A Torch for the Path to Omniscience

A Word by Word Commentary on the Text of the Longchen Nyingtik Preliminary Practices

by Chökyi Drakpa

Empty in essence, expansive like space and free from the limits of conceptualelaboration, is
the Dharmakāya.With the nature of clarity, blazing brightly like the sun and ornamented withthe
signs and marks, is the Sambhogakāya.The display of compassionate energy, manifesting
in various ways out ofcompassion, is the Nirmāṇakāya.At the feet of the Lama, inseparable
from the three kāyas, I make heartfeltprostrations, my body, speech and mind filled with
devotion.The rivers of the mind-direct, sign and aural transmissions,All come together and
converge in Jigme Lingpa,His wisdom-mind treasure was the Heart-Essence of Nyingtik,And
it is to the recited words of its preliminary practices,That I now compose this commentary.


Blessing the Speech

Firstly there is the blessing of the speech. The syllables OṂ, ĀḤ andHŪṂ are the essence of
the enlightened body, speech and mind. They purifyobscurations of speech and bless your own
ordinary body, speech and mind withthe enlightened body, speech and mind. Upon your tongue
faculty is abright syllable RAṂ, from which arises a fire, consumingall defilements and
obscurations of speech. The fire transforms into athree-spoked vajra of red light. In its
centre, or belly, are the voweland consonant mantras, and around them is the Essence of DependentOrigination.
The syllables are like a string of pearls. From them streamout five-coloured
rays of light with countless offering substancesat their tips, to the buddhas and
bodhisattvas of the ten directions,thereby pleasing them. Then as the rays of light converge
back,the letters of the vowel and consonant mantra and the Essence of DependentOrigination
descend like rain and dissolve into your speech chakra,purifying all your obscurations
of speech. And through this, allthe blessings and siddhis of the vajra speech of the buddhas
andbodhisattvas are obtained. If you recite the vowel and consonant mantrasand the Essence
of Dependent Origination seven times, or three times, at dawnbefore anything else, it
is said that the power of your speech will bemultiplied one hundred million times.

THE ACTUAL NGÖNDRO

1. The Ordinary Preliminaries

Within the actual preliminary practice, there are the ordinary (outer) andextraordinary (inner)
preliminaries. The ordinary (outer) preliminaries arereflections on: the difficulty of
gaining the freedoms and endowments; deathand impermanence; the karmic principles of cause
and effect; the defects ofsaṃsāra; and how to follow a spiritual teacher.

a. The Difficulty of Gaining the Freedoms and Endowments

This first section consists of an invocation of the master’s wisdom mind, andrecognition of
the freedoms and endowments.

i. Invocation of the Master’s Wisdom Mind

Firstly, as you recite “O lama, care for me!” three times, pray one-pointedly with an uncontrived
faith that is vivid, eager and confident. Vividfaith comes from thinking of the qualities
of the master and the Three Jewels.It is a very vivid and joyful state similar to the
way a small child feelswhen seeing its mother. Eager faith is the eager wish to abandon
negativeactions having reflected on their faults; and the eager wish to undertakepositive
actions having considered the benefits they bring. It is similar tothe yearning that someone
suffering from extreme thirst has for water.Confident faith is a confidence in the qualities
of the master and the ThreeJewels, which cannot be shaken by temporary circumstances
or events, and atrust in the laws of cause and effect strong enough to survive the worst
kindof circumstances such as illness. This is the kind of faith one should have.

If you don’t have this kind of faith, and you just mouth the words “O lama!”and call out, you
won’t receive any blessings. It says in the sutras:

The pure Dharma will not arise in those without faith,Just as fresh shoots will not grow from
burnt seeds.

So, giving an example to illustrate this kind of faith, the text says, “The blossoming lotus
of devotion at the centre of my heart.” When you go tosleep at night, consider that the lama
descends from the top of your head [toyour heart] and then fall asleep with your mind
indivisibly united with themaster’s wisdom mind.

Then, as soon as you get up, early in the morning, recite, “O lama, care for me!” three times,
with the three kinds of faith described above. Like a lotusflower blossoming in the sunlight,
the eight-petalled lotus at your heartunfurls its petals through the strength of your
faith. Pray to your onlyconstant refuge in this life and the next, your lama, whose supremecompassion
for you is such that he rises out of the state of great bliss andsimplicity
of the dharmakāya, in his ‘form body’. Pray with these words:“Please look upon me with compassion!
I have accumulated negative karma andharmful actions in the past, and now, as a
result, I am plagued byturbulent emotions, which are so strong that I suffer terrible misfortune
inmy Dharma practice that hinders my progress on the path. To protect mefrom the enemy
of disturbing emotions, rise up through the central channel tothe space above the chakra
of great bliss at the crown of my head, upon alotus, and sun and moon disc seats. Remain
there as the jewel ornamentand lord of my buddha family until I attain enlightenment, I
pray!”

The method for guarding the mind from the disturbing emotions is described inthe Bodhicaryāvatāra:

If, with the rope of mindfulness,You bind firm the elephant of the mind,You will let go of every
fear,And find virtue close at hand.

Your mind is like an elephant or a wild horse. The mindfulness of focusingon virtuous states
of mind like faith, or devotion, is like a rope or atethering post. And the awareness, which
discerns whether or not mindremains in that virtuous state, is like a shepherd. So, as
a guard to ensurethat you are never distracted from mindfulness and awareness, you invoke
thelama, by praying: “Rise up out of compassion from the expanse of thedharmakāya, so that
my mind does not become distracted from what is virtuous.And look upon me with your eyes
of wisdom, I pray!”

ii. Recognizing the Freedoms and Advantages

There are eight freedoms and ten advantages. Firstly, if you were born inthe hell, preta or
animal realms, you would suffer from intense heat andcold, from hunger and thirst, or from
enslavement, and it would be impossible for you to practise the Dharma. If you were born
amongst the long-living gods, it would also be impossible because you would not have any thought
of practising the Dharma. The Buddha’s teachings are not found in uncivilized lands
of the border regions, so living there is also an impossible state.Those with wrong views
do not have any possibility of practising theDharma because their minds are contaminated
by false beliefs, and they arejust like Devadatta or Lekpe Karma. If you were born in a world
where abuddha had not come, or during a dark kalpa, it would be impossiblebecause even
the words ‘Three Jewels’ would be unknown. If you were bornincapable of understanding, it
would be impossible to practise the Dharma because you would not be able to understand the
meaning of the teachings. When you have a physical body that is free from these 'eight states
where there is no chance for Dharma practice', it is known as possessing a support for
Dharma practice complete with the eight freedoms.

Secondly, the ten advantages are divided into the five personal advantages and the five circumstantial
advantages. With regard to the first of these, beingborn as a human being means
that you have a proper physical support for practising the Dharma. Having all five faculties
intact means you can study the teachings and contemplate them. In a central land means
to be born in a place where the teachings are available. A lifestyle that is not harmful
or wrong means that your body, speech and mind are in harmony with the Dharma. Having faith
in Buddha’s teachings means recognizing that they provide a special path leading to freedom
from saṃsāra, and a state which surpasses the situation of the worldly gods. When you
possess these five endowments, 'the five personal advantages' are said to be complete.

For the five advantages due to circumstances to be present, a buddha must have come into the
world, an event as rare as the appearance of anUḍumbara flower; he must have taught the three
wheels of Dharma; and the teachings must have survived without fading. There must be
extraordinary friends who have embraced the teachings;[1] and a master or a spiritual friend
must have accepted you. These five are known as 'the five advantages due to circumstances'.

If you have every one of these eighteen freedoms and advantages then you have what is known
as a ‘precious human life’, and you are in a position topractise the teachings that bring
about permanent freedom from saṃsāra.Nevertheless, if you succumb to negative influences and
adopt an incorrectlifestyle and so on, then your human life will have gone to waste. As
it issaid:

Finding a human life with freedoms and advantages,Is like finding a priceless jewel,Just look
how those without renunciation,Waste this opportunity!

Or:

Used well, this body can be a ferry to liberation,
Used badly, it is an anchor in saṃsāra.

b. Meditating on Impermanence

There are many circumstances that cause death. It is possible to die from anattack of epilepsy,
after becoming bed-ridden with a chronic terminal disease,from food poisoning, from falling
from a precipice, or from being attackedwith weapons. It is uncertain when death will
come. Life is as precarious as acandle fluttering in the wind, or a tiny bird perched on
the branch of a tree.There is no telling if, having gone to sleep at night, you will wake
up thefollowing morning. You are alive now, yet it is uncertain whether or notyou will still
be alive in a year’s time. Having left this life behind, youwill have to go on to yet
another realm of existence. So pray: “O GuruRinpoche, from this day forward, turn my mind
towards the practice—carefor me! And see that my practice does not stray onto the wrongpaths,
such as practising merely to avert sicknesses and demons in this lifeor to gain food and
clothing! Keep me from falling into the inferior attitudeof seeking liberation from saṃsāra
for myself alone, leaving all my pastmothers behind! Omniscient Master of Dharma Longchen
Rabjam, you know me!Compassionate root lama, you who are one with the Precious MasterGuru
Rinpoche, Longchen Rabjam, and Rigdzin Jigme Lingpa— care for me!”

If you do not seize the opportunity to practise the Dharma offered by this present situation,
having obtained all the freedoms and advantages, then in future lives you will not find
such a perfect physical basis for attaining liberation from saṃsāra. That you have gained
this happy existence now is a result of the slight merit you have accumulated in past lifetimes.
If you do not practise virtue in your present situation, and instead accumulate only
harmful actions, then once the merit from past lives that provided this physical basis is
spent, after death you will wander as a being in the lower realms. Once you are born in
such an unhappy state, you will not know good from bad, and you will never even hear the sound
of Dharma. You will not meet a spiritual friend. You will be just like a blind person
left alone in the middle of a vast desert. What a terrible disaster! What a tragedy! Sentient
beings in the hell realms are as numerous as atoms in the earth. Hungry ghosts are as
numerous as grains of sand on a riverbank. Animals are as numerous as grains in a barrel
of chang. If you think of the numbers and kinds of beings in the lower realms, you will realize
just how slim is the chance of gaining a human body. In comparison to other beings,
humans are as numerous as the particles of dust on your fingernail. And even among human beings,
those people whose behaviour is harmful and contrary to the Dharma are like stars in
the night sky, whereas those who really act according to the Dharma are as rare as stars
in broad daylight. Reflecting on this, pray: “O Guru Rinpoche, turn my mind towards the practice—care
for me! Omniscient masters Longchenpa and Jigme Lingpa, keep me from straying
onto the wrong paths! Compassionate lama, you who are one with them, care for me!”

Since practitioners of virtue are so scarce, to obtain a human body islike arriving at an island
of jewels. To attain such a promising basisas this, complete with all the freedoms and
endowments, and then use it onlyto amass negative deeds would be like a merchant landing
on an island ofprecious jewels and then returning empty-handed. With such a fickle andimpetuous
mind you will not have any foundation for attaining liberationfrom saṃsāra, and your
body will only help you to create further suffering.

It is especially important not to fall prey to the eight incidentalcircumstances that make Dharma
impossible or the eight impossible states wheremind cuts us off from the Dharma. Firstly,
to be misled by corruptinginfluences, which means meeting teachers who do not act according
to theDharma. Then, despite your occasional desire to practise Dharma, you may beprevented
from doing so by your conflicting emotions, when the fivepoisons are raging inside
your mind, and you are swept away by theirstrength. Or whilst practising, negative karma
may overtake you andripen as negative circumstances. If you don’t know how to integrate these
intothe path, then they will become obstacles. You may wish to put the teachingsinto
practice, but if you lack diligence, you will be distracted bylaziness. In some cases, you
may have an interest in the teachings, whilstbeing a slave under someone else’s control.
There are also those whomerely appear to be engaged in the path and just pretend to practise
forthe sake of gaining food and clothing, or as a cure for illness or harmfulspirits, or
out of fear of punishment. This is like putting donkey meatinto a container and passing
it off as quality venison or camel meat. Althoughyour attitude conflicts with the teachings,
you act like a practitioner in thecompany of others in the hope of gaining some respect
or reward. Beingchronically senseless and stupid means not feeling any enthusiasm whenlearning
of the qualities and benefits of positive actions and not fearing theconsequences of
negative actions, having been influenced by negative friends.These are 'the eight incidental
circumstances that make Dharmaimpossible'.

Then there is the second set of eight. The first of these occurs when, eventhough you see and
hear about the sufferings of saṃsāra, such as those in thethree lower realms, you do not
fear them, and therefore feel only slightdisenchantment and little renunciation. It is said
that faith (ordevotion) is like a precious wheel, which rolls along the path of virtue
dayand night. And faith is the most important among the seven noble riches. Yetthere is a
state in which you lack the jewel of devotion for the teachingsand for the master. There is
also a state in which you are caught in thebonds of worldly ties and cravings for wealth,
possessions and friends. Inanother state, you might have a negative character just like
black coal thatcannot be made clean, and engage constantly in crude, degeneratebehaviour,
incurable like a poisonous snake. Having never pacified yourbody, speech and mind, you may
never hold back from negative, harmfulactions that conflict with the teachings. Or owing
to your lack of eventhe slightest real interest, you may not have even a hint of a virtuousmind,
just like an animal gazing at a temple. You might be left with yourprātimokṣa and bodhisattva
vows all broken, or your samayacommitments of the secret mantrayāna torn to shreds
through havingdisparaged the master and so on. These are 'the eight impossible stateswhere
mind cuts us off from the Dharma'.

Pray as follows: “When these sixteen impossible states come upon me,menacing my Dharma practice,
O Guru Rinpoche, turn my mind towards thepractice—care for me! Omniscient masters, Longchenpa
and Jigme Lingpa, keep me from straying onto the wrong paths! Compassionate lama,
you who are one with them—care for me!”

You must rid yourself of such adverse circumstances because once you havefallen into any of
these impossible states, you will not have the chance topractise Dharma purely and authentically.

At this present moment, your body is not ravaged by sickness, and your mind is free from pain,
nor are you like a slave under someone else’s control. So now that you have this perfect,
auspicious quality of total independence, if you waste the freedom and advantages of this
human life through your own indolence or laziness and distraction, then there is no need
to mention that you will be separated from your companions, possessions, relatives and loved
ones when you die! Even this body you hold so dear, which is like the house of consciousness,
will be carried out alone from its bed and taken to some desolate spot to be torn
to pieces by foxes, vultures, dogs and so on. When that happens, your consciousness will
be swept through the bardo realm like a feather blown about in the wind and there will be
nothing but terror in store for you. So you should pray, “In order to protect me from these
fears, from this day on, O Guru Rinpoche, turn my mind towards the Dharma—care for me! Omniscient
masters, Longchenpa and Jigme Lingpa, keep me from straying onto the wrong paths!
Compassionate lama, you who are on with them—care for me!”

The sūtras say:

Those who are lazy and lack diligence,May live for a hundred years.But it would be just as well
to live for a few days,Having constant diligence.

And The Precious Treasury of Essential Instructions (Mengak Rinpoche’i
Dzö) says:

Don’t give away this human body with its freedoms and endowments to theenemy of food and clothing,Don’t
give away this altruistic mind of bodhicitta to the enemy of lesservehicles,Don’t
give away the jewel-like nature of mind to the enemy of delusion,Don’t give away the two
wish-fulfilling accumulations to the enemy of thispresent life,Don’t give away the practice
of compassion to the enemy of laziness,And don’t give away the mind of fervent devotion
to the enemy of wrongviews!

This is exactly how you should practice.

c. Karma: Cause and Effect

The results of beneficial and harmful actions will follow me. This means the various individual
experiences of pleasure and pain undergone by beings in the six classes occur purely as
a result of their own positive and negative actions. The Sūtra of a Hundred Actions says:

It is the variety of actions,
Which creates the variety of beings.

And the Sūtra of Advice to the King (Rājāvavādaka Sūtra) says:

When his time has come, even a king has to die,And neither his friends nor his wealth can follow
him.So for us – wherever we stay, wherever we go –Karma follows us like a shadow.

Although the results of our actions do not manifest immediately, they never goto waste. The
Sūtra of a Hundred Actions says:

The actions of beings never go to waste,Even in a hundred aeons.They are accumulated, and, once
the time comes,The result will come to fruition.

Even tiny negative actions should be avoided. The Sūtra of the Wise and
Foolish says:

Do not disregard small misdeeds, thinking they are harmless,Because even tiny sparks of flame,Can
set fire to a mountain of hay.

Once, during the era of the Buddha Kaśyapa’s teachings, there was a monkcalled Shebu Kapila[2]
who teased the other monks by calling them names such as ‘horse-head’. Altogether he called
them by eighteen such names. It is said that later, during the time of Buddha Śākyamuni,
he was reborn as a fish-like sea monster with eighteen heads. It is also said that a monk
who compared another monk to a monkey was reborn as a monkey for five hundred lifetimes.
And there are countless other examples which could be mentioned.

The great Bodhisattva Śāntideva said:

If a single moment’s negativity,Can lead to an aeon in the Avīci hell,Then with all our harmful
acts accumulated in saṃsāra without beginning,What chance is there of going to the higher
realms?

The Sūtra of the Wise and Foolish also states:

Do not disregard small positive acts either, thinking they are withoutbenefit,Because even tiny
drops of water,Will eventually fill a large container.

In the past when the King Māndhāta was a beggar, he threw a handful of peas to Buddha Kṣantiśaraṇa.
Four fell into the Buddha’s alms bowl and two struckhis heart. As a result, he reigned
as ruler over the four continents foreighty thousand years, then became ruler in the
heaven of the Four Great Kings for eighty thousand years, and finally ruled the kingdom of
Indra for half as long. Then there was the beggar woman who offered a bowl of water to a
śrāvaka disciple of Buddha Śākyamuni and was reborn in the heaven of the Thirty-three. It
is also said that if an animal hears the name of a buddhaonce, they will escape the lower
realms and be reborn in the higher states ofexistence. The benefits of positive actions are
inconceivable.

The Treasury of Essential Instructions says:

Listen to the words of the master, the most cherished instructions!Study the words of the victorious
one, and put your trust in them!By day and by night, dedicate your virtue and limit
your misdeeds!Reflect on how the interdependence of cause and effect will determine yourfuture!Relinquish
your attachment to the body and possessions you hold so dear!And apply
the points of the tantras, āgamas and upadeśas to your mind!

Take this to heart.

d. The Defects of Saṃsāra

Basically, wherever you are born within saṃsāra, whether it is in the higherrealms or the lower
ones, you will only ever be tormented by the three kindsof suffering.

In particular, if you are born in the hell realms as a result of thekarma of accumulating harmful
actions, in the eight hot hells the entirefloor beneath your feet will be of burning
iron. In the first, theReviving Hell, whatever you see turns into an enemy who attacks you
withweapons. Your head and body are hacked to pieces, and you experiencethe suffering of
dying and being revived time and again. The life span ofbeings in this realm is described
in the Application of Mindfulness Sūtra:

The beings of the Reviving Hell live for one hundred and sixty two thousandtimes ten million
human years.

The life span doubles for each of the hells below this one.

In the Black-Line Hell multiple lines are drawn on your body which is thenripped apart with
saws. In the Crushing Hell countless beings are wedgedin mortars of iron the size of whole
valleys and crushed with red-hothammers. In the Howling Hell you are trapped in a doorless
cell ofburning iron and worn out with suffering and pain. In the Great HowlingHell you are
trapped in an iron cell like before, but with double walls, andyou scream out loud ly in
agony as you are beaten with hammers and otherweapons. In the Heating Hell you are impaled
on red-hot spikes andtridents, and wrapped in strips of heated iron. In the Intense Heating
Hellyou are boiled in great vats of molten bronze. Whenever your head isstruck with a
hammer you lose consciousness and in that instant you mayexperience a slight feeling a relief,
but otherwise you experience nothing butsuffering and pain. The life span of beings
there is impossible to count inyears. In saṃsāra, there are twenty intermediate kalpas for
each of theperiods of formation, subsistence, destruction and void. The beings in theIntense
Heating Hell live for half of one of these intermediate kalpas.

In the Avīci Hell of Ultimate Torment you are burned in a fire of themost intense heat, greater
than that in the other seven hot hells. Thebodies of beings there are indistinguishable
from the flames and can only beperceived by the sound of their agonized screams. Weapons
fall from the skyand hell-workers torture you with weapons causing you pain seven times moreintense
than that experienced in the earlier hells. In this one of the eightHot Hells,
the life span is one intermediate kalpa.

All the eight cold hells are surrounded by snow mountains, which arecompletely frozen at their
base. There, in the dark, on terrifyingprecipices of ice engulfed by squalls and blizzards
of snow, your tendernaked body is lashed by freezing cold winds. You break out in blisters,which
burst open into festering sores. You let out a ceaseless wail ofagonized screams
in the Hell of Lamentations. And in the Hell of Groans, youexperience suffering hard to
even think about, like a dying person whosestrength is all gone, and let out deep gasps and
groans. You grind yourteeth and clench them together in the intense cold. Your flesh turns
blueand the skin cracks open into four pieces like a blue lotus, and then thered raw flesh
that is exposed cracks further into eight pieces like ared lotus. Finally it turns an
even darker red and splits even deeperinto sixteen, thirty-two and then innumerable pieces
like a great red lotus.Worms with metal beaks penetrate the cracked flesh and start to eat
away atyour insides. These eight different sufferings are called the Eight ColdHells.

The life span of beings in the Hell of Blisters is equal to the time it wouldtake to empty a
container capable of holding two hundred kośalā measuresfilled with sesame seeds, if you
removed a single grain every hundred years.For the other cold hells, the life span and sufferings
increase by multiplesof twenty for each one.

Similarly, in each of the four directions surrounding the Hell of UltimateTorment, there are
four neighbouring hells, such as the 'Plain of RazorBlades'. When the karma that led you
there is exhausted, you leave theAvīci Hell and see an attractive plain. You walk towards
it, but when youreach it, it turns into a plain of weapons, cut ting your feet toribbons.
Similarly, you see what appears to be a pleasant forest, but onceyou arrive there it becomes
a 'Forest of Sword Blades' where your bodyis gashed and chopped. Then you see a river and
go towards it to have adrink, but it transforms into a 'Swamp of Putrefying Corpses'. You
becomesubmerged in it up to your head and worms with metal beaks eat away at yourflesh.
Alternatively, you may see a shady trench, but once you arrive there itchanges into a 'Pit
of Hot Embers' and sinking inside it, you suffer asyour flesh and bones are burnt away.
These are the sixteen NeighbouringHells that ring the Hell of Ultimate Torment.

The Ephemeral Hells are changing, in the sense that their location is notfixed and the degree
of pain experienced there is also uncertain. Yousuffer through taking birth in a door, pillar,
fireplace, rope and soon—in a mortar, a broom, or a pot. You suffer as you are trapped
inside astone, crushed between rocks, burned in a fire, boiled alive, or cut limb fromlimb
as a piece of wood is cut. These are the 'Ephemeral Hells' in whichyou are always made
use of and exploited.

The cause of being born in any of these eighteen hells could be a vast accumulation of harmful
actions perpetrated out of desire or delusion. Even so, a single momentary act such as
taking life or speaking harsh words to an exceptional being, when carried out with a mind
of intense anger, will propel you straight to the hells. As the Bodhicaryāvatāra says:

If a single moment’s negative action,Can lead to an aeon in the Avīci hell,Then with all our
harmful acts accumulated in saṃsāra without beginning,What chance is there of going to higher
realms?

Pray with the words of the text, “Whenever intense hatred and aggressionarises, O Guru Rinpoche,
turn my mind towards the practice—care for me!Omniscient masters Longchenpa and Jigme
Lingpa, keep me from straying onto thewrong paths! Compassionate lama, you who are one with
them—care for me!”

It is essential to give up your conflicting emotions. The Letter to a Friend
states:

Having heard of these boundless sufferings,Only someone with a mind as hard as a diamondWould
remain unaffected and unafraid.And if just seeing pictures, hearing descriptions,Or reading
and thinking about the hells brings you such terror,What will you do when you actually
experience thereThe full, inexorable effects of your actions?

Likewise, with sufferings similar to those of the hells, the preta realm is destitute of food
and drink, creating hunger and thirst. It is a grim place of rocks and charred tree stumps,
where the words 'food', 'drink' or 'comfort' have never even been heard. In the past,
Śroṇa travelled to the preta realm and, growing thirsty, he asked the beings there where he
could find some water. They replied that although they were born there twelve years previously
this was the first time they had heard mention of water. Since these pretas do not
find anything to eat or drink for months and years on end, their bodies are emaciated like
skeletons and they lack even the strength to stand. There are three different kinds of suffering
they experience.

Firstly, those with external obscurations will go for many months and yearswithout even hearing
any mention of food or water. Then, from time to time,they might see a stream or some
fruit trees far away in the distance. Withweak limbs and aching joints they struggle to get
there, but as they approachthey find that the water has all dried up or the trees have withered
away. Orelse the water and trees are still there, but they are guarded by beings whocarry
weapons, which they use to beat the pretas and cause them pain.[3]

The pretas with specific obscurations undergo sufferings such as having manycreatures living
on their bodies devouring them.

The life span for beings in this realm is about fifteen thousand human years.

There are many reasons for being born as a hungry ghost, such as eating inthe afternoon after
taking the vows of a one-day fast, but the principal causeis being miserly or greedy for
wealth and possessions.

Animals living in the wild are in constant dread of being eaten by oneanother or killed by hunters.
Domestic animals are exploited andworked until exhaustion, forced to pull ploughs
or carry heavy loads. Evenwhen sores break out on their backs they are just given more to
carry. Theyare made to carry people on their backs and they are often killed.Bewildered as
to what to do or not to do, they have no idea how topractise virtue and only amass negative
actions, so they are oppressed bylimitless suffering and lack any means of escaping from
saṃsāra.

The seed or cause for being born in such a state is wandering into the darkness of stubborn
stupidity, and thereby failing to undertake virtue and refrain from non-virtue. So pray as
follows, “From this day forwards, O Guru Rinpoche, turn my mind towards the practice—care
for me! Omniscient masters, Longchenpa and Jigme Lingpa, keep me from straying onto the wrong
paths! Compassionate lama, you who are one with them—care for me!”

Therefore we must practise virtue and give up negative actions.

Even in the higher realms of the gods and human beings there is no real
happiness.

As the Application of Mindfulness Sūtra says:

There is never any joy in saṃsāra,
Not even the tip of a needle’s worth.

And the Lord Maitreya said:

There is no joy among the five classes of beings,Just as there can be no pleasant fragrance
in a cesspit.

As humans we face the three fundamental sufferings, the four great rivers ofsuffering of birth,
ageing, sickness and death, the sufferings caused by fearof encountering hated enemies,
or parting from loved ones, and the sufferingsof facing situations we do not want, or not
getting what we do want.

The asuras or demi-gods suffer from wars and strife. The gods face thesuffering of death and
transmigration, and the suffering of falling into thelower realms.

So, no matter where we might take birth, among any of the six classes ofbeings, there is nowhere
that is beyond the nature of suffering.

As the Treasury of Essential Instructions says:

Our cherished homes and countries are like the iron cells of hell,Wives and children are like
the forest of sword blades,Decorations and fine clothes are like the fiery tongues of flame,Food
and drink are burning lumps of metal,And servants and workers the guardians of hell,Angry
quarrels are like a hail of glowing embers—Understand that they all bring virtue
and goodness to ruin.

e. How to Follow a Spiritual Friend

Having entered the path of the Dharma, and takenthe outer vows of the prātimokṣa [Skt.]—the
vows ofan upāsaka/upāsikā [Skt.] (‘lay practitioner’), novice or a fullyordained monk or nun—you
still haven’t put a stopto your erring ways and transgress the four root andvarious
branch vows.

You have entered the door of the Mahayana, aroused thebodhicitta motivation of wishing to attain
buddhahoodfor the benefit of all sentient beings and taken the vowsof the bodhicitta
of aspiration and application. Butyou simply repeat phrases like, “May all beings havehappiness!”
and so on, whilst lacking any beneficialthought for others, and with an attitude that
is maliciousand deceitful.

Having embarked upon the path of secret mantra,and received the vase empowerment you are requiredto
practice kyérim [Tib.], or the ‘development phase’.Having received the secret empowerment,
you shouldpractice mantra recitation; having received the knowledgeempowerment, you
should meditate on dzogrim [Tib.](‘the completion phase’); and having received the fourthempowerment,
you should meditate on the meaningof shunyata. Though you have received these
fourempowerments many times you do not even do theslightest practice of the development
and completionphases of meditation.

Considering how you have strayed onto wrong paths,pray with the words, “O lama, free me from
thesefalse paths!” This is a prayer to avoid falling under theinfluence of your conflicting
emotions. Through relyingupon a qualified master you should maintain the preceptsof the
prātimokṣa, the bodhisattva vows, and thecommitments of secret mantra, as they are described
intheir respective texts. Then, through the coming togetherof the master’s blessing and
your own faith and diligence,like a hook passing through a ring, you will be liberatedfrom
saṃsāra, crossing over to its far shore.

Apart from that, there is not some other method wherebythe lama just releases you from saṃsāra,
without yourhaving to undertake positive actions and abandonnegative actions, like a passenger
carried along in a ferryor someone ‘liberated’ by being killed with a weapon. Ifthis
were the case, then since the buddhas love all sentientbeings equally as their very own
children, they wouldliberate all limitless beings in an instant, without leaving asingle
one behind in saṃsāra. There was not the slightesthair’s breadth of a difference between
the love BuddhaŚākyamuni felt for Devadatta and the love he felt forRāhula. If his compassion
and blessings alone couldhave liberated them, it would have been impossible forDevadatta
to fall into the hells.

So it is very important that you take the words of theBuddha and your master to heart and put
them intopractice just as they have taught. As our Teacher said:

I have shown you the path to liberation.But liberation depends on you alone.So practise with
diligence!

And Śāntideva said:

Countless buddhas, working for beings’ benefit,Have already come and gone;Yet on account of
my faults,I have not been an object of their healing,And if I continue on this course,Again
and again, it will be the same.

Although you have not realized the view of shunyata,you act recklessly as if you were ‘a master
of crazywisdom’ and disregard the law of cause and effect.Though you are distracted in
your meditation andlack the qualities described in the scriptures, you allowyourself to remain
stuck in concepts, and proudly refuseto follow a qualified teacher. If you were really
puttingyour heart into the practice, your body, speech, and mindwould be in complete harmony
with the teachings, aswas the case with Glorious Atiśa and Geshé Ben. Eachtime they
had a negative thought, they would drop itimmediately, and get down from their horse to perform
amandala offering. This is how you should be. But insteadof this, even though your mind
is filled with disturbingemotions and the actions of your body and speech areat fault,
you ignore your own shortcomings and dwellon the imperfections of others. This is like having
aghost at your eastern door and performing the ransomritual of lü at the door in the
west. Having an intellectualunderstanding of the difference between beneficial andharmful
actions and then acting in a way that contradictsthe teachings is a sign that you are Dharma-stubborn,like
the hide of a butter bag, which is made tough byconstantly being in contact
with grease.

Pray that the lama may free you from your stubbornnessand non-Dharmic behaviour and then practise
accordingto the teachings.

Although you suffer from sickness and could dietomorrow, you are full of craving for and attachment
tohouses, clothes, and possessions. Although your youthhas passed and you are quite
old, you do not have theslightest disenchantment or renunciation for saṃsāra.Although you
possess only the slightest wisdom gainedthrough study, reflection and meditation, like the
frogwho lived in the well, you pride yourself on all yourknowledge. This arrogance comes
from falling under thepower of delusion, so pray that the lama will free youfrom such ignorance,
and then abandon your attachmentto saṃsāra and your pride in your own qualities.

The time of your death is uncertain and, like a candle inthe breeze or a little bird on the
branch of a tree, you aresurrounded by potentially dangerous circumstances. Yetstill you forget
about death and busy yourself with theaffairs of this life, such as taking part in local
rituals. Witha mind that is distracted, you may physically remain insolitary retreats,
but all the while your basic characterremains as tough as a block of wood. To remain calmlike
a jackal in the woods, without having uprooted yourdisturbing emotions, speaking softly,
while attachmentand aversion boil inside your mind, is like the behaviourof a crane or
a cat. All of this is a sign that you are underthe influence of the eight worldly obsessions:
gain bringsyou happiness, and loss makes you suffer; you are happyto receive praise,
but blame makes you angry; famemakes you happy, and insignificance saddens you; andyou are
joyful in happiness, but despair when you suffer.Pray with the words, “O lama, free me from
these eightworldly concerns!”

You should not allow yourself to become too preoccupiedwith concerns such as happiness and suffering,
but viewthem all equally—in one taste—and integrate them intoyour practice. This
is achieved firstly by recognizingthat the one who is happy when praised and becomessad when
blamed is essentially empty. Both are equallyillusory, dream-like, and lacking in true
reality. Secondly,it is said:

When you are happy, dedicate it as a gathering of virtue:May all of space be filled with benefit
and happiness!

Whenever you experience happiness by gaining wealth orrenown, or new clothes, or eating a delicious
meal, insteadof holding onto that pleasure as your own, train yourmind by dedicating
it. Think to yourself, “May all sentientbeings, especially the hungry ghosts, the poor
and thehomeless, all enjoy this kind of happiness and pleasure!”

When suffering befalls you, such as when, for example,you hear something unpleasant or are afflicted
by illness,it is said:

When you suffer, take on the sufferings of all,May the ocean of suffering dry up completely!

Train your mind by thinking to yourself, “In addition tomy own sufferings, may I take on the
sufferings of allbeings and may they enjoy happiness and well-being!”

Pray in the following way: “Quickly rouse me from thisdeep sleep of ignorance, in which I am
like an animalwho does not understand the difference between positiveand negative actions!”
And pray that you may be inspiredby a healthy fear of causing harm and an enthusiasm forbeneficial
actions.

Throughout the course of your lifetimes withoutbeginning, up until the present, you have not
known howto practise the Dharma as a way of gaining freedom fromsaṃsāra. Instead, you continue
to languish in saṃsāra’sprison. Pray that you may develop a genuine heart ofsadness
and renunciation and be quickly freed from thedismal imprisonment within saṃsāra, thereby
attainingthe state of liberation and omniscience. Take this to heart.

The Treasury of Essential Instructions says:

One birth is sufficient: cut the ties of attachment today!One accumulation is sufficient: see
the master as the Buddha!One action is sufficient: accomplish the Lama Buddha!One training
is sufficient: abandon non-Dharmic actions!One recognition is sufficient: recognize the
dharmatā!One practice is sufficient: abide by that very state of reality!

2. The Extraordinary Preliminaries

There are six sections to the extraordinary preliminaries.

a. Taking Refuge

The first of these sections is taking refuge, which is explained in terms ofthe divisions of
refuge, the way to take refuge, and finally the benefits andprecepts of refuge.

i. The Divisions of Refuge

Generally, it is said that refuge is the foundation stone of all Dharmapractices, and that which
opens the door to refuge is faith. The importance ofthe three types of faith has already
been shown above. It may be furtherdemonstrated by the stories of Ben of Kongpo and the
old lady and the dog’stooth.

ii. The Way to Take Refuge

As for the method of taking refuge, the field of merit should be visualizedaccording to the
descriptions in the various commentaries. Then:

The Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha are supreme among all that is rare, like apriceless jewel. They
constitute the outer refuge. The real essence orembodiment of these three is the Sugata,
the Buddha, as theSublime Continuum (Gyü Lama) says:

The single refuge is the Buddha.

The three roots are the lama, yidam and khandro, the inner refuge of thesecret mantrayāna. They
are like the root or the basis for all the positiveaccumulations until you attain enlightenment.
Taking refuge in order to usethe channels as the nirmāṇakāya, train the inner air
as thesambhogakāya, and purify the tiklés—whose nature is thebodhicitta—as the dharmakāya
is the secret refuge. The ultimate refuge isthe primordial wisdom present within the wisdom
mind of these objects ofrefuge—the mandala of the empty essence, the cognizant nature
andthe all-pervading compassionate energy. In order to accomplish this withinour own mind-stream
we take refuge until enlightenment is fully realized.With this in mind we take the
vow of refuge.

iii. Precepts and Benefits of Taking Refuge

As regards the precepts and benefits of taking refuge, in terms of preceptsthere are three things
to be abandoned, three things to be adopted and threesupplementary precepts. Firstly,
having taken refuge in the Buddha, do nottake worldly deities such as local spirits as your
outer refuge and do notmake offerings to them. Having taken refuge in the Dharma, refrain
fromharming other beings. Having taken refuge in the Saṅgha, do not associate withnon-buddhist
extremists (tīrthikas), or anyone whose behaviour is contraryto the teachings. Regarding
the three things to be adopted, having takenrefuge in the Buddha, you should honour
and respect any representation of hisbody, even a tiny piece of broken statue. Having taken
refuge in the Dharma,you should respect and take care to preserve the written teachings,
evenfragments of paper bearing a single syllable. In the past, when Lord Atiśasaw a scribe
putting his pen in his mouth as he wrote, he cried out, “Atsama!That’s not right!” Having
taken refuge in the Saṅgha, even a patch of red oryellow cloth from their robes should
inspire you with faith. As supplementaryprecepts, rely upon your spiritual master and practise
without doing anythingthat violates or conflicts with his body, speech or mind. Listen
to theteachings and follow the Dharma and the Saṅgha.

It says in the Pig’s Story (Pak Gi Tokjö):

Whoever takes refuge in the BuddhaWill no longer be reborn in the lower realms.Forsaking even
the body of a human being,They will be reborn among the gods.

And the Parinirvāṇa Sūtra says:

Whoever takes refuge in the Three [Jewels]
Will swiftly attain enlightenment.

b. Arousing Bodhicitta

There are three sections: training the mind in the four immeasurables;arousing bodhicitta, the
mind turned towards supreme enlightenment; andtraining in the precepts of bodhicitta in
aspiration and bodhicitta inapplication.

i. Training the Mind in the Four Immeasurables

Ho is an expression of compassion. The objects of compassion are the beings of the three realms
and six classes. They are mesmerized by the variety of perceptions, apprehending an ‘I’
where there is no ‘I’, and a self where there is no self. These misperceptions are said
to be like seeing a pile of stones from a distance and mistaking it for a person, or perceiving
a coloured rope as a snake, or thinking, like a small child, that the illusory (not
truly existent) reflection of the moon which appears in water is the real moon.

Cultivate compassion for beings by considering their miserable situation: allof them—throughout
the three realms and six classes—grasp at their deludedperceptions, imagining them to
be real, and wander endlessly in saṃsārawithout finding any escape, like the turning of a
wheel, or a rosary.

All beings, as limitless in number as space is vast, are our very own mothersand fathers who
have shown us exactly the same kindness as our parents in ourpresent lifetime. So that these
parents of ours may remain no longer intheir pitiful state, and instead attain enlightenment,
finding comfortand ease in the luminosity and all-pervading space of the true nature
of theirminds, we should train our minds by means of the four immeasurables.

1. Equanimity

Initially, we need to train the mind in equanimity. The way in which we arecurrently attached
to our friends and aggressive towards our enemies is afault which comes from failing to
examine the situation thoroughly. Inreality, today’s so-called ‘enemies’ have, in the course
of our many pastlifetimes, been dear friends who have helped us enormously. And those whom
wecurrently consider to be our ‘friends’ have been our enemies in pastlifetimes, having
caused us considerable harm.

The Noble Kātyāyana said:

He eats his father’s flesh, while striking his own mother,And cradles in his lap the enemy he
killed;The wife is gnawing at her husband’s bones.saṃsāra is enough to make you laugh out
loud!

Recognize that this bias, which currently causes us to see some people as ourfriends and others
as our enemies, is a result of having fallen under thepower of ignorance. Train your mind
until you feel a benevolent attitude, likethe one you have now for your present mother
and father, for all beings,especially your ‘enemies’ and those who create obstacles for you.

2. Love

Then, since these beings have shown you exactly the same kindness as yourcurrent parents, cultivate
love for them all and wish them happiness in orderto repay their past kindness. Train
yourself to be like parents caring for asmall child, or a mother bird looking after her
young, so that all youractions of body, speech and mind are undertaken only to ensure the
happinessand well-being of others.

3. Compassion

Cultivate compassion, which is the wish for beings to be freed from suffering.Imagine a prisoner
who is about to be executed, or an animal at theslaughterhouse, and put yourself in their
position, or imagine that they areyour own dear mother. When you experience an unbearably
intense feeling ofcompassion for them, consider that although the one experiencing suchsuffering
is not actually your mother or father in this lifetime, he or shehas been your
mother and father countless times throughout the course of yourinnumerable lifetimes. Practise
cultivating this compassion until you feelexactly the same compassion for all sentient
beings as you do for your ownmother and father.

4. Joy

Whenever you see someone who is wealthy and powerful, and apparently enjoyingall the pleasures
of the higher realms, or whenever you see someone whopossesses the qualities of scriptural
learning and realization, do not feelresentful or envious of them, even if you consider
them to be an enemy.Instead, feel joyful and make the wish that their riches and power increaseeven
further. And pray that all sentient beings may experience the same kindof good
fortune. Train your mind in this way, again and again.

If, when you practise training the mind in these four immeasurables, youproceed gradually— first
considering your own parents; then including yourfriends and relatives; and finally extending
the practice to your enemies—youwill come to feel the same love and compassion for
your enemies as for yourparents. This is the measure of your mind training.

ii. Arousing Bodhicitta

As for the actual practice of arousing bodhicitta, whilst in a state that ismindful and aware
of these points of training the mind in the fourimmeasurables, visualize the field of merit
in front of you—just as you did inthe refuge practice—which then becomes the witness to
your arousing ofbodhicitta.

The bodhicitta of wishing to attain enlightenment for the benefit of allsentient beings is pledging
yourself to the goal. This is the bodhicitta ofaspiration, which is like making a
wish to go to Lhasa, for example.

Vowing that until you attain enlightenment you will practise the sixperfections, such as generosity,
and strive with effort until saṃsāra iscompletely empty, is pledging yourself to
the cause. This is the bodhicittaof application, which is like making the actual journey to
Lhasa up until youreventual arrival there.

The Bodhicaryāvatāra says:

Understand that, briefly put,bodhicitta has two aspects.Just as one would know the differenceBetween
wishing to go and going on a journey,The wise should understand these two,Recognizing
their difference and their order.

Once you have taken the vows of the bodhicitta of aspiration and application,whilst being mindfully
aware of the words of the practice and their meaning,the field of merit melts into
light and dissolves into you. Consider that allthe two-fold bodhicitta present within the
wisdom minds of the deities ariseswithin your own mind-stream. And then rest in the state
of indivisibleemptiness and compassion.

iii. Training in the Bodhicitta Precepts

Thirdly, there is training in the bodhicitta precepts. This includes, in thecontext of the bodhicitta
of aspiration, meditations on equalizing self andothers, exchanging self and others,
and considering others as more importantthan yourself. And for the bodhicitta of application
there is the practice ofthe six perfections.

1. Precepts of the bodhicitta of Aspiration

Firstly, since all beings are equal in that they want happiness and wish toavoid suffering,
we should abandon the attitude of attachment and aversionwhich causes us to cherish ourselves
and feel aggressive towards others. Train in the practice so that you view yourself and
other beings as equals.

Secondly, the way to meditate on exchanging self and others is to practisegiving happiness and
receiving suffering as you breathe in and out (thepractice of tonglen). No matter what
unwanted suffering comes your way, focus on wishing to take on the suffering of others as
well. Train your mind in this practice, which is illustrated by the story of Daughter, and
the Buddhapulling a wagon in the hell realm.[4]

When you train your mind in considering others as more important thanyourself, cultivate the
willingness to take birth even in the hells should itbe of benefit to other beings. This
is illustrated by the stories of Atiśa’steachers Maitrīyogi and Dharmarakṣita; the bodhisattva
Metok Dadze; and the Buddha in his earlier rebirths.

2. Precepts of the Bodhicitta of Application

Then, the training in the precepts of the bodhicitta of application, which istraining in the
six pāramitās, or the six perfections.

The first of these, generosity, is divided into material giving, giving theDharma, and giving
protection from fear. You should practise these three kinds of generosity according to your
capacity. At the very least, you should offer Sur (burnt offerings) and water tormas,
since this offering incorporates all three kinds of giving.

Discipline is divided into the discipline of avoiding negative actions, thediscipline of undertaking
positive actions, and the discipline of bringingbenefit to beings. The first kind
of discipline means that you give up eventhe slightest unwholesome deed of body, speech or
mind. The second means that you strive to practise virtue as much as you possibly can, beginning
with the tiniest of positive acts. Be sure to embrace these acts with the properpreparation,
main part and conclusion. Thirdly, bringing benefit to beingsmeans working for
the welfare of others through the four ways of attractingdisciples,[5] once the time has
come for you to do so, and when you are free from any selfish motivation. For beginners, it
is most important to train the mind in the first two types of discipline with the bodhicitta
motivation of wishing to benefit others.

Patience consists of being patient when wronged; the patience to bearhardships for the Dharma;
and the patience to bear the profound truth without fear.

Diligence is divided into armour-like diligence; diligence in action, whichmeans exerting yourself
to practice the Dharma and fearing laziness with asmuch energy as someone who discovers
a poisonous snake in his or her lap; and insatiable diligence. Insatiable diligence is
never being satisfied by alittle, or a few months, or even a few years of virtuous practice,
and insteadexerting yourself to practise throughout your entire life.

Meditative concentration includes the childish concentration of those whopractise in isolation
away from distractions and busyness, but are attached tothe experiences of bliss, clarity
and absence of thought. There is also theclearly discerning concentration in which emptiness
is clung to as anantidote; and the concept-free samādhi of intrinsic reality, which
is known as'the concentration delighting the Tathāgatas'. These should be practisedsuccessively,
in stages.

Sixth, is the pāramitā of wisdom. Through the wisdom that comes from hearing,you are able to
recognize the disturbing emotions. Then, through the wisdomthat comes from reflection, you
are able to overcome the disturbing emotionstemporarily. And finally, through the wisdom
that comes through meditation,you conquer completely the enemy of negative emotions and obtain
theconfidence of knowing inexpressible and inconceivable reality with the wisdomof discriminating
awareness.

If you fail to arouse this altruistic attitude of bodhicitta in your mind,then, however much
you might act virtuously and avoid negativity for your ownsake, you will not become enlightened.

The Bodhicaryāvatāra says:

What need is there to say more?The childish work for their own benefit,The buddhas work for
the benefit of others.Just look at the difference between them.

c. Meditation and Recitation of Vajrasattva

In the practice of Vajrasattva, the four powers must be complete.

The first of the four powers is the power of support. ĀḤ signifies theunborn nature. Reflect
on how all phenomena included within your ordinarydualistic perception are empty, devoid
of self and sky-like. From that state,the essence of which is clear and spacious, generate
compassion for all thosewho have not realized this themselves. And then, with the wish to
attainenlightenment for the benefit of all beings, visualize yourself in yourordinary form.
Consider that about eighteen inches above your head is a white lotus. If you are following
the extensive commentary [Kunzang Lama’i Shelung] the lotus has a thousand petals, whereas
according to the briefer commentary [by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo] it has eight petals.
Upon it, in the centre of a full moon-disc seat, is a white syllable HŪṂ, which melts into
light and becomes your own root lama in the form of Vajrasattva. He is brilliant white,
with complete sambhogakāyaadornments.

He is ornamented with all thirteen adornments: the five silk adornments of the headscarf, upper
garment, long scarf, belt and lower garment; and the eight jewelled ornaments of the crown,
earrings, short necklace, armlets, two long necklaces (one longer than the other), bracelets,
anklets and rings.

His legs are crossed in the vajra posture. His right hand holds avajra at his heart, and his
left holds a bell against his hip. Theconsort white Vajragarvā (Dorje Nyemma)[6] has her
legs crossed in the lotus posture, and is embracing Vajrasattva.

Consider that their bodies appear vividly and distinctly, yet lack any truereality, just like
reflections in a mirror.

Then, understanding that it is through relying on you, Lama Vajrasattva,and taking you as a
refuge and support with one-pointed faith that allour negative actions will be purified, we
pray: “Take care of me and all other beings! Look after us! Purify all our negative actions
andobscurations!” Pray like this with such intense devotion that tears come toyour eyes.

The second power is the power of regret. Consider how, throughout all yourlifetimes, throughout
beginningless time until now, you have accumulatednegative actions with your body, speech
and mind. And even in this life, youhave committed intrinsically negative acts such as
the ten non-virtues, and‘proscribed negative acts’, which are all the transgressions of theprātimokṣa,
bodhisattva and mantrayāna vows.

With the deepest regret, like somebody who has swallowed poison, you should acknowledge all
your negative acts “without concealing anything, and without hiding anything.” Without any
thought of keeping your negative actions secret, openly confess them, saying to yourself:
“I committed this negative action. I acted wrongly in this way. I did this and that.”

Just as, in society, if we are guilty of a crime such as manslaughter we aremade to express
our regret and then pay compensation, here, too, we shouldconfess our negative actions of
the past and then vow not to repeat them.

The third power is the power of resolve, or the power of turning away fromfaults and misconduct.
In the past, you have accumulated all kinds of negativeactions out of ignorance, disrespect,
recklessness, and turbulent emotions.But now, through the kindness of your spiritual
master, you understand thegains and losses incurred as a result of positive and negative
actions. Sofrom now on, even if your life is at stake, vow to refrainfrom harmful actions.

The fourth power is the power of action as an antidote. Even though anyvirtuous action will
function as an antidote to our negativity, in thispractice we concentrate on visualizing the
deity and reciting the mantra.

So, the text says:

In Vajrasattva’s heart, upon a full moon, is the letter HUNG, encircled by the letters of the
hundred syllable mantra mala. Reciting the hundred syllables of the mantra causes rays of
light to emanate from the mantra māla, invoking his wisdom mind. From the point of union
of the bliss-emptiness play of yab-yum, a cloud of nectar, the nature of which is bodhicitta,
flows down like a stream of milk (or camphor) and enters my body through the top of my
head and the heads of all sentient beings of the three worlds. Through this, my past negative
karma and more immediate destructive emotions—the causes of suffering—are purified.

All illnesses are expelled through the pores of the skin and the two lowerorifices of your body,
in the form of pus and blood. All harmfulinfluences (dön) are expelled in the form of
creatures such as spiders,scorpions and snakes. All negative actions and obscurations are
expelledin the form of black liquid, smoke and soot. The ground beneath you opens upto reveal
Yama, the Lord of Death, surrounded by his entourage, thecontrollers of karmic debts.
All the impurities flow into their open mouths.They are satisfied. All your karmic debts
are repaid and untimely death isaverted. Yama turns away and the earth closes up again.

Pray that all your faults and imperfections, such as the wrongdoing of theten non-virtues, which
are negative by their very nature, the downfallsthat are infractions of discipline and
the blockages due to breakages ofsamaya are completely purified, till not a single one remains.

Recite the hundred syllable mantra, considering that as a result of your one-pointed faith,
your body becomes clear and unobstructed inside and out, like acrystal vase filled with milk.
As it fills with nectar, you obtain the fourempowerments and the wisdom of the four joys
arises in your mind-stream.

Cry out to your master like a child calling for its mother. We use the words,“O protector!”
because the master serves all beings as their refuge, andprotector. “Under the power of ignorance
and delusion, not knowing thebenefits of positive actions and the faults of harmful
actions, I have goneagainst and corrupted my samaya. Lama protector, be my refuge andprotect
me from the experience of suffering! Chief of all themandalas, embodiment of all the
buddhas, Guru Vajradhara you are theembodiment of great compassion. Chief of all living beings,
untilenlightenment I take refuge in you!”

There are twenty-seven root samayas of the body, speech and mind.[7]Firstly, there are three
sets of three samayas related to the body. The outerthree are to abandon stealing, sexual
misconduct and taking life. The innerthree are to abandon abusing your father and mother,
your vajra family andyour own body; abusing the Dharma and other individuals, and striking
your own body; and forcing yourself to undergo the hardship of extreme asceticdiscipline.
The secret three are to abandon striking the body of a vajrarelative, or criticizing ornaments
they may be wearing; striking your vajrasisters or making sexual advances to the lama’s
consort; and stepping on orover the lama’s shadow, or acting carelessly with your body
and speech in thelama’s presence.

There are three sets of three commitments related to the speech. The outerthree are to abandon
lying, slander and harsh words. The inner three are toabandon speaking disrespectfully
about someone who teaches the Dharma, who contemplates its meaning, or who meditates on the
natural state. The secret three are to abandon being disrespectful about what is said by
vajra brothers and sisters, those in the master’s entourage, or the master himself.

There are three sets of three commitments related to the mind. The outer three are to abandon
malice, covetousness and wrong view. The inner three are to abandon careless activity; dullness
or agitation in your meditation; andclinging to the views of eternalism or nihilism.
The secret three are tomaintain an awareness of the view, meditation and action throughout
everysession of practice, to maintain an awareness of the yidam deity, and to havefaith
in the teacher and love for your vajra brothers and sisters.

There are twenty-five branch samayas.[8] Firstly, there are the five to be recognized: the five
aggregates, the five elements, the five faculties, the five consciousnesses, and the five
objects. They should be recognized as the maṇḍala of deities of the three seats.[9] Once
they have been understood, there are the five to be accomplished: the vajra family, ratna
family, padma family, karma family and tathāgata family. There are five substances to be
accepted at the time of accomplishment: faeces, urine, blood, semen and marrow. There are
five signs of warmth in the practice not to be rejected: the transformation of the five
poisons, which are matured into the five wisdoms. There are five to be practised when the
signs on the path have become manifest: the three [negative] actions of the body and lying
and idle gossip. You should practise them in order to accomplish the benefit of others.

“I confess all my impairments of these commitments! I implore you:let my negative actions caused
by disturbing emotions, cognitiveobscurations, and wrongs or downfalls, such as those
describedabove—all my flaws—be completely cleansed and purified!”

By confessing and making a resolution in this way, with all four powerscomplete, Vajrasattva
is pleased and smiling, says: “Son/daughter of anenlightened family, your negative actions,
obscurations, wrong doing anddownfalls are all purified.” Granting his forgiveness, he
melts into light anddissolves into you. Through this, you too become Vajrasattva,appearing
yet empty, like a reflection in a mirror. At your heart, upona full moon , is HŪṂ, around
which the four brilliantly radiant syllablesOṂ VAJRA SA TVA emanate rays of five-coloured
light. Offering goddessesappear at the tip of each ray of light, holding boundless offering
substances,such as the eight auspicious symbols, in their hands. They offer these to thebuddhas
and bodhisattvas of the ten directions, who are pleased and send backtheir blessings
and siddhis in the form of five-coloured rays of light whichdissolve into you. Light rays
emanate from the mantra māla once again,transforming the outer environment into the pure
land of Abhirati ('ManifestJoy'), and causing all beings to take on the nature of Vajrasattva’senlightened
body, speech and mind. With this in mind, recite the mantra.

At the end of the session, the outer environment dissolves into the bodies ofthe Vajrasattvas
within it. All their bodies dissolve into you. You melt intolight, which is absorbed into
the mantra māla. The mantra māla dissolves intothe HŪṂ. The HŪṂ then gradually dissolves,
beginning with the shyabkyu (thevowel sign), and you rest in the state of śūnyatā.

Then, in a single instant, you visualize the environment and beings as thepure realm and Vajrasattvas
once again, and dedicate the merit and makeaspirations.

When you practise visualization and recitation like this, it is vital not tointerrupt the recitation
with ordinary speech, and not to allow the mind tobecome distracted. As the tantras
tell us:

If you lack samādhi meditation,You are just like a stone in the ocean’s depths:You might recite
the mantra for aeons,But still there will be no result.

Nevertheless, if you can do the practice with the attitude of bodhicitta andwith the four powers
complete, then you will purify even serious harmfulactions. As Śāntideva said:

Like the inferno at the end of time,
Instantly, it will burn away harmful deeds.

d. Offering the Maṇḍala

Your practice should be embraced by the points of ‘good in the beginning, goodin the main part,
and good at the conclusion’.

If you are accumulating the practice and you have an accomplishment maṇḍala,anoint it with bajung
and scented water, and, having arranged five piles [ofgems, medicines or rice] on top
of it, place it on your shrine. If you do nothave an accomplishment maṇḍala, visualize the
field of merit as before.

The material of the offering maṇḍala plate should suit your resources:precious metal is best;
other metals, such as bell-metal, are the next best;while materials like stone or wood may
be used as a last resort.

Precious stones make the best offering substances; medicines are the nextbest; and at worst,
you could use grains, such as barley or rice, when cleanedand washed with scented water.

Wipe the maṇḍala clean again and again, and anoint it with scented water andbajung. Then offer
the Thirty-Seven Point Mandala as it is generally done.

In this particular context, we offer what is known as the Trikāya Maṇḍala.

OṂ, ĀḤ and HŪṂ were explained earlier.

i. Nirmāṇakāya

The four continents, Mount Meru and the god realms up to the Abode of Brahmāconstitute a single
realm. Multiplying this realm by a thousand, you arrive atwhat is called a ‘first-order
universe of one thousand worlds’. Multiplyingthis universe by a thousand, you arrive at
an ‘intermediate universe of onethousand times one thousand worlds’. If you then multiply
the intermediateuniverse a thousand times, you will have what is called a billion-folduniverse,
which is one hundred times ten million worlds.

This billion-fold universe is filled with the seven precious gems and allthe wealth of gods,
nāgas and human beings, both riches that are ownedand natural riches possessed by no one.
Visualize the whole universe filledwith precious gems and so on, and then consider also your
own body,possessions and sources of merit—the three bases of self-clinging— and offer
them all continually and in their entirety. Pray that, as a result, you may turn the wheel
of the Dharma, just as BuddhaŚākyamuni did.

ii. Sambhogakāya

The inconceivable paradise of the sambhogakāya is the highest heavenbecause it is above the
nirmāṇakāya realms, and it is also a place of GreatBliss, because bliss and emptiness are
indivisible within the minds ofbeings who dwell there. It is known as Tukpo Köpa ('Densely
Arrayed')because it is beyond measure, and it is perfect with the five certainties.The certain
place is this pure realm of Ghanavyūha, or Tukpo Köpa. The certainteachers are the buddhas
of the five families. The certain teaching is theMahāyāna, or that which is beyond
words. The certain audience is made up oftenth bhūmi bodhisattvas. And the certain time is
the perpetually turningwheel of eternity.

Visualize this maṇḍala of the buddhas of the five families and thenconsider that countless offering
goddesses, such as the goddess of beauty andso on, manifest within it. The entire
space becomes filled withinconceivably vast clouds of offerings of every variety of sensual
andemotional stimulants. Pray that through this offering, you may enjoythe perfection of
the sambhogakāya fields.

iii. Dharmakāya

“Where all appearance and existence are completely pure” signifies thatthere is no falling into
the fixed view that the whole outer and inneruniverse—the environment and beings—are solid
and real. Instead, everything isvast, expansive and profoundly spacious. Since the essence
of the dharmakāyais beyond birth and death, it is described as youthful, and since there
isa clarity that comes from its knowing aspect, it is called the vase body.

When this wisdom mind of the dharmakāya is taken as the base of the maṇḍala,then the ornaments
of the dharmakāya are all the rising thoughts. Theserising thoughts manifest from the dynamic
energy and play of dharmatāemptiness and unceasing compassion, which are unstained
by disturbingemotions.

All clinging to the perception of kāyas and tiklés, which can occur from the stage of 'increase
of experience' [the second of the four visions of tögal] until 'awareness reaching full
maturity' [the third vision], is naturally liberated.

Pray that through this offering, with its piles representing the dynamicenergy of the dharmakāya,
you may attain the level of the dharmakāya andenjoy the freedom of the dharmakāya reality.

e. The Kusāli’s Accumulation

The word kusāli means ‘beggar’. Hermits and renunciants who lack any otherpossessions make offerings
of their own bodies. We cherish our bodies morethan any of our other belongings,
so the benefits of making them into anoffering are also greater. As it is said:

Offering your horse or elephant is worth hundreds of other offerings;Offering your child or
spouse is worth thousands;Offering your own body is worth hundreds of thousands.

Jetsün Milarepa described the meaning of the syllable Phaṭ as follows:

The outer Phaṭ gathers together thoughts that are scattered.The inner Phaṭ clears away the dullness
of awareness.The ultimate Phaṭ is resting in the natural condition.

By abandoning all thoughts of self-grasping and attachment to this body held so dear, the demonic
forces of seduction through desire (the ‘Māra of the Son of the Gods’) are destroyed.
Your consciousness becomes a sphere of light, which shoots out through the 'aperture of
Brahmā' at the crown of your head into all-pervading space. Immediately, in order to destroy
the demonic force of death (the 'Māra of the Lord of Death') your consciousness transforms
into Tröma Nakmo, holding a hooked knife in her right hand and a skull-cup in her left,
and with a sow’s head protruding from behind her right ear.

With her right hand she uses the hooked knife that symbolizes destruction ofthe demonic forces
of conflicting emotions (the 'Māra of DisturbingEmotions') to slice the top off your corpse’s
skull, destroying thedemonic forces of the aggregates of ego (the 'Māra of the Skandhas').
Herleft hand holds the skull-cup to carry out her activity, which she placeson the
hearth of three human heads inwardly representing the threekāyas, each as big as Mount Meru.
The skull-cup is placed so that the browis facing towards you and then the corpse, now
an offering as vast as abillion worlds, is placed inside it with the hooked knife in her
righthand.

Below the skull-cup, the fire of wisdom blazes up from the stroke of aletter A and this causes
nectar to melt and drip from the upside-downwhite syllable HAṂ above. Consider that any
impurities are purifiedthrough OṂ, the offering is multiplied through ĀḤ, and transformedthrough
HŪṂ into great clouds of 'space-treasury' offerings with theessential nature of wisdom
nectar, but manifesting as whatever beings desire.

Recite OṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ as many times as you can.

Then visualize the field of merit as it appears in the refuge practice,surrounded by all the
beings of the six classes, especially those beings thatcause you harm. From your heart, emanate
countless offering goddesses.Immaculate nectar is the white feast offered by the offering
goddesses to theguests above, pleasing and satisfying them. Inconceivable offering
substancesmanifest out of the steam that rises from the boiling nectar: the fiveofferings
such as flowers, the five sensual pleasures such as visible forms,the eight auspicious symbols,
the seven emblems of royalty and the five meatsand five nectars. This is the variegated
feast, and offering it pleasesthe guests, whereby the two accumulations of merit and wisdom
areaccumulated and, as the attainment of the supreme siddhi, your mind isperfected in
the two types of bodhicitta. You also attain the ordinaryaccomplishments of long life, increased
merit and so on.

For the guests below—the beings of the six classes of saṃsāra—theḍākinīs take the nectar from
the skull-cup and scatter it so that it fallsfrom the sky like rain. Consider that all sentient
beings receive some of thenectar to drink and are satisfied. As the variegated feast,
consider thatwhatever the beings of the six classes desire rains down on them and throughthis
they are pleased and satisfied. The creditors to whom you owekarmic debts that shorten
your life because you have killed, that plague youwith sickness because you have attacked
and beaten others, and that make youpoor because you have stolen, receive whatever they
desire: food, clothes,houses, land and so on. As they enjoy these offerings, consider that
all yourdebts are repaid.

In particular, think of the jungpo demons of the eighty thousand classes, who create obstacles
for you and cause harm to sentient beings, together with the lame, the blind, the deaf
and the mute, who gather in the hope of receiving the leftovers. To all the harmful influences
and obstructing forces that crave flesh and blood, dedicate a mountain of flesh, an ocean
of blood and a mass of bones piled up like the banks of a river, imagining it all to
be like the flesh and blood of a seventh-birth brahmin.[10] Consider that it satisfies them
physically and they develop the attitude of bodhicitta in their minds. Then the remaining
guests all receive and enjoy whatever they desire, such as food or clothing. The lame receive
the limbs of miraculous powers. The blind obtain the eyes of wisdom. The deaf hear immaculate
sounds. The mute receive the tongue of intelligence and so on. In this way, all
those who are weak and underprivileged are satisfied.

Through the merit and virtue of this, all illnesses that plague the body,all conflicting emotions
that disturb the mind, and all destructiveinfluences and obstacles are pacified into
all-pervading space. Harmfulcircumstances that conflict with the Dharma, all selfish clinging
towealth and possessions, and thoughts of self-grasping are exploded.

Finally, the offering of the body and the mind that offers, together with all the guests to
whom the offerings are made, dissolve into the nature of Dzogpachenpo, the fundamental nature
of your mind, in which they are no longer clung to as being true, but seen as illusory
and dream-like. This is the state of śūnyatā. Resting in this great simplicity, seal the
practice into the dharmadhātu sphere of intrinsic reality with the syllable ĀḤ.

Unless you exert yourself in gathering the accumulations and purifying yourobscurations through
practices such as this, meditative experience andrealization will never arise.

The Treasury of Songs of Realization (Dohas) says:

Ultimate co-emergent wisdom can only come,From gathering the accumulations and purifying obscurations,And
through the blessings of a realized master.It would be foolish to rely on any
other method.

f. Guru Yoga

Within Guru Yoga—the practice that brings swift blessings—there are three
sections.

i. Visualization of the Field of Merit

Emaho is an expression of wonder and amazement. What is so wonderful and amazing?

Guru Rinpoche, the Precious Master of Orgyen, was not stained by an ordinary birth, but was
born miraculously in the Milky Lake in the northwest[11] of Oḍḍiyāna. Then, in India and Tibet,
he subdued arrogant spirits and demons and worked as a regent of the Buddhadharma. Finally,
he attained the immortal vajra body, and travelled to the island of the rākṣasas in
the southwest, where he now resides, having established the teachings there and transformed
the place into a pure realm. This is wonderful and amazing.

Do not perceive your surroundings as ordinary and constructed through effort and exertion. Instead,
you should see your environment as a pure realmmanifesting naturally and spontaneously
through Orgyen Rinpoche’sblessings. Although this is generally said to be a nirmāṇakāya
realm fortaming beings, for someone who has extraordinary perception this is a realmof
infinite purity, a heaven of the dharmakāya, sambhogakāya andnirmāṇakāya.

In the Prayer of Aspiration for the Copper-Coloured Mountain of Glory,[12] the nine verses from
the line, “A spontaneous array…etc” to the line, “Sending out clouds of offerings…” establish
the nirmāṇakāya realm. Then the verse beginning, “Above lies the limitless palace
of the sambhogakāya…”, establishes the sambhogakāya realm. Then the verse that begins, “Above,
in the joyful pure land of the dharmakāya”, establishes the dharmakāya.

So this three kāya realm arrayed in complete and perfect detail is theGlorious Copper Coloured
Mountain. And here, in the very centre of apalace, is your own body, manifesting with the
essential nature of YesheTsogyal, but the form of Vajrayoginī.

She has one face and two hands, and her body is a bright blazing red.If you are following the
commentary of Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo, she holds ahooked knife in the right hand and a skull-cup
full of blood in theleft. According to Patrul Rinpoche’s commentary, she is playing
a skull-drumwith her right hand, whilst her left hand holds a hooked knife against herhip.
She is standing with her two feet gracefully poised, the left legslightly drawn in, and
she is wearing silk and bone ornaments. Her threeeyes gaze into the sky in devotion.

In the sky directly above the crown of your head (according to PatrulRinpoche’s commentary)
or in the space level with the top of your head andfacing you (according to Jamyang Khyentse
Wangpo), seated upon sun and moon-disc seats and a multi-coloured lotus with a thousand
petals, is theembodiment of all sources of refuge, inseparable from your own rootmaster,
in the form of the nirmāṇakāya 'Lake-born Vajra'.

His complexion is white with a tinge of red and he has the youthfulappearance of an eight-year
old child. He is wearing the dark blue gown ofa mantra practitioner, the red and yellow
shawl of a monk, the marooncloak of a king, and the red robe and secret white garments of
abodhisattva. He has one face and two hands, and he is seated inroyal poise. In his right
hand he holds a vajra at his heart, andin his left hand he holds a skull-cup, which contains
the vase ofimmortality, filled with deathless wisdom nectar, in its centre.

On his head he wears a five-petalled lotus hat, which has three points symbolizing the three
kāyas, five colours symbolizing the five kāyas, a sun and moon symbolizing skilful means
and wisdom, a vajra top to symbolize unshakable samādhi, and a vulture’s feather to represent
the realization of the highest view.

Cradled in his left arm he holds the 'supreme consort', Mandarava, who arouses the wisdom of
bliss and emptiness, concealed as the three-pointed khaṭvāṅga trident. The three prongs of
the trident symbolize the essence, nature and compassionate energy. Three severed heads,
dry, fresh and rotten, symbolize the dharmakāya, sambhogakāya and nirmāṇakāya. Nine iron
rings represent the nine yānas and five-coloured strips of silk symbolize the five wisdoms.
The khaṭvāṅga is also adorned with locks of hair from dead and living mamos and ḍākinīs,
as a sign that they have been subjugated.

He presides amidst a shimmering aura of rays and rings of rainbow light. All around him, enveloped
in a beautiful lattice of white, blue, yellow, red and green light, are the King Trisong
Detsen, the twenty-five disciples, all the paṇḍitas and mahāpaṇḍitas of India such as
Vimalamitra, the eighty mahāsiddhas, and all the great scholars and accomplished vidyādharas
of Tibet.

Also present are the peaceful and wrathful yidam deities associated withthe four classes of
tantra, the ḍākas and ḍākinīs of the three abodes, andan ocean-like gathering of dharmapālas,
guardians and protectors whokeep the samaya. They all gather like billowing clouds.

All the deities are vivid and distinct, like reflections in a mirror.Visualize them in the state
of the great equality of clarity andemptiness, so that all your ordinary perceptions
cease.

Then, when you invoke the jñānasattvas, faith and devotion are extremelyimportant. In the same
way that the reflection of the moon will appearautomatically in a pool of water that is
clear and still, the wisdom deitieswill remain inseparable from anyone possessing faith.

It says in the sūtras:

For whoever has faith in me,
I, the sage, will remain before them.

And the Kathang says:

If you pray to me, I, Padmākara, am there.

There is also the story of Magata Zangmo, who, with one-pointed faith, recitedprayers to the
Buddha, such as the one beginning “The protector of all beingswithout exception”, for a whole
month. As a result of her prayers, he appearedinstantly in the sky before her house,
together with his assembly of arhats.Keeping such stories in mind, generate a strong and fervent
devotion.

The Seven Line Prayer

HŪṂ is an expression of magnetism and a skilful means to invoke the wisdom minds of the jñānasattvas.

The place where the Precious Master took birth was in the northwest of theland of Oḍḍiyāna.
There, in the Milky Lake, where the water has the eightqualities of purity, he was born in
the form of an eight-year old child inthe heart of a lotus flower. The King of Oḍḍiyāna found
that he wasendowed with the most marvellous attainments and invited him to hispalace.
As he had been born from the heart of a lotus, he became renowned asthe 'Lotus Born'. At
the time of his birth, he was surrounded by hosts ofḍākinīs. Following in the footsteps of
this wonderful master, vow topractise until you reach his level of realization. Pray that
just as hearrived at the palace of the King of Oḍḍiyāna in the past, he may come nowand inspire
you with his blessing.

GURU means master. PADMA signifies that he is an emanation of Amitābha, since Amitābha belongs
to the buddha family of lotus speech. SIDDHI stands for the accomplishments, and HŪṂ for
gathering. So altogether it means, 'Gather the accomplishments of the Lotus Master!'

Praying like this, without even the slightest hypocrisy, will cause OrgyenPema Thötreng Tsal
and all the deities of the three roots to arrive from thepure land of Ngayab Palri and descend
like rain, merging indivisibly with thesamayasattvas.

ii. Seven Branch Practice

The seven branch practice (or the seven aspects of devotional practice)incorporates all the
key points for gathering the accumulations.

The first branch is prostration, which is the antidote to pride. HRĪḤ isthe seed or the basis
for the manifestation of the prostration offering. So,with HRĪḤ, emanate bodies as numerous
as atoms. Having created all theseemanations, you say, “I offer you prostrations,” and
consider that youprostrate together with all the beings of the three realms, expressing respectwith
your body, speech and mind.

As you touch your palms to your three centres, all the obscurations anddefilements of your body,
speech and mind are purified. As you touch the fivepoints of your body to the ground,
the obscurations of the five disturbingemotions are purified, and the blessings of the enlightened
body, speech,mind, qualities and activity are obtained.

When offering prostrations, it is not appropriate to perform them crookedly,without standing
up straight, or whilst swinging your hands about. It is saidthat practising in this way will
only cause you to be reborn as a hunchback.

The second branch is offering, which is the antidote to stinginess. Arrangesome clean offerings
as a focus for the practice and offer them with apure motivation, in which there is no
trace of miserliness, hypocrisy orpretension. Then create offerings in your mind through
the power ofsamādhi. Visualize the outer environment as a vast celestial palace madefrom the
seven precious materials, with beautiful gardens and pleasure parks,within which all material
objects appear as the five offerings such as flowersand so on, the five sensual stimulants
such as visible forms, the eightauspicious symbols, seven emblems of royalty, and
the sixteen offeringgoddesses.

All these offerings fill the whole of space and extend throughout the purelands of the buddhas
and bodhisattvas. Seal them with the gesture ofoffering, as in the offering clouds of the
Bodhisattva Samantabhadra, andoffer them.

The third branch is confession, which must involve all four powers. As thepower of support,
trust in the field of merit as a method for purifying yourharmful actions. As the power of
regret, develop remorse for all thenegativity you have accumulated including the ten non-virtuous
actions (thethree of the body, the four of the speech and the three of themind).
Feel as much regret as if you had just swallowed poison. As thepower of resolve, vow not to
repeat them in future.

For the power of action as an antidote, consider that all your harmful actionsand obscurations,
and all those of other sentient beings, are gatheredtogether in the form of a black pile
on the tip of your tongue. Then rays oflight emanate from the field of merit, strike the
pile, and purify it justlike a stain being completely washed away.

Ultimately, the way to confess and purify is by resting in theluminosity of the dharmakāya nature
of mind without grasping at thethree spheres (of subject, object and activity) as being
true or real.

The fourth branch is rejoicing, which is the antidote to envy. Rejoice atall the virtues accumulated
by yourself and others, both those undertakenwhilst observing the relative reality
of cause and effect, and thosepertaining to the absolute truth, such as the practices of
emptiness andselflessness.

This is a way in which you can accumulate great waves of merit, without havingto strain your
body or your voice, or expending your wealth in offerings. Inthe past, when an old beggar
woman rejoiced from the depth of her heart at theofferings made over four months by King
Prasenajit to the Buddha and hisdisciples, it is said that her merit was even greater than
the king’s.

Since rejoicing at negative actions will cause you to accumulate faults in asimilar way, do
not mistake what is to be avoided for what is to be adopted.

The fifth branch of requesting to turn the Wheel of the Dharma and the sixthbranch of requesting
the Noble Ones not to pass into nirvāṇa both serve as anantidote to delusion.

Without someone to teach us the Dharma we would be like blind people leftalone in the desert.
We would have no chance of achieving liberation fromsaṃsāra.

So multiply your body and present yourself at the feet of all the buddhas,bodhisattvas and spiritual
teachers who have the capacity to teach but do notdo so. Offer them wheels and conch
shells, and just as Brahma and Indrarequested the Buddha in the past, request them to
turn the wheel of theDharma of the three yānas—the vehicles of the śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas
andbodhisattvas—according to the receptivity and needs of different beings.

Then, pray before all the buddhas and bodhisattvas who intend to pass intonirvāṇa, just as the
layman Cunda did in the past. Multiply your bodycountless times and pray with the words,
“Until saṃsāra is completelyempty, and all beings are liberated, do not pass into nirvāṇa,
but remain hereamong us!”

The seventh branch is the branch of dedication. Consider that the virtue youhave just accumulated
represents all the merit and positive actionsaccumulated by yourself and others throughout
the past, present andfuture. Dedicate it all so that all beings may attain supremeenlightenment.

Remember that not only is the virtue you have accumulated illusory and dream-like, but so too
are its recipients. Not grasping at the three spheres ofsubject, object or action as being
real is what is called ‘free fromreference’. This is not the same as meditating upon a
totally empty state,which is the nihilist view and something you should avoid.

Generally, it is said that whichever virtuous action we undertake to perform,we should first
arouse the motivation of bodhicitta, perform the virtuousaction with the wisdom that is free
of all grasping, and seal it with theillusory dedication.

All actions that are supported by these three noble principles contributetowards your liberation
and are the cause of enlightenment. If your actionslack the three noble principles, then
the merit you attain is ordinary merit,and having come to fruition once will then go to
waste. Virtuous actionembraced with the support of the three noble principles continues
to yieldbeneficial effects a hundred times without ever being exhausted, and instead,increases
further and further. As Śāntideva said:

The tree of bodhicitta will forever
Bear fruit and grow unceasingly.

iii. Prayer and Empowerments

Next there is the section of fervent prayer and receiving the path
empowerments.

The attainment of liberation and omniscience is dependent upon the realizationof co-emergent
wisdom within your mind. Whether or not that realization arisesin your mind depends on the
blessing of the master; and whether or not youreceive the blessings depends upon your devotion.

Drikung Kyobpa Rinpoche said:

Unless the sun of devotion shinesUpon the snow peak of the master’s four kāyas,The stream of
blessings will never fall.So strive to arouse devotion in your mind!

And Rangrik Repa said:

Expecting to realize non-conceptual wisdom,Without praying to the precious master,Is like waiting
for sunshine in a north-facing cave,That way, appearances and mind will never merge.

Come to the firm decision that your own root teacher is equal to the buddhasin terms of qualities,
but surpasses the buddhas in terms of kindness.

Firstly, accomplishing the siddhi.

Je means the lord of refuge for all beings. Tsün signifies that he is unstained by disturbing
emotion. Guru means lama, the unsurpassed. Rinpoche means precious jewel. In the same way
that precious jewels provide you with all that you need and wish for, the master is the
basis for all goodness and positivity until you attain enlightenment.

We pray by saying, “You are the embodiment of the compassion and blessings of all the buddhas
of the ten directions and three times.”

Paṇchen Rinpoche’s Offering to the Gurus (Lama Chöpa)[13] says:

Even a single hair from the pores of your body,Has been well praised as our field of meritThat
surpasses all the buddhas of the ten directions and three times,Lord of Refuge…etc.

And:

Adorned with the precious wheels and the three kāyas of the sugatas,Out of the alluring web
of appearances, with skilful means,You manifest in an ordinary form to lead all beings—Lord
of Refuge, compassionate master, to you we pray!

“The only protector of all beings, my body, my possessions, my heart and soul without hesitation,
or the wish to hold anything back, I surrender to you! From now until I attain enlightenment,
if I find myself in a state of happiness as my practice of virtue increases, even
if I just enjoy a single delicious meal, I shall recognize it as the kindness of the precious
master. When I am suffering from illness or destructive influences, I shall see it as
the activity of the lama, helping me to exhaust negative karma that might cause rebirth
in the hell realms. I will understand all good circumstances to be the master’s blessing and
all bad circumstances to be the fault of my past actions. When I find myself in a high
situation, I will not become arrogant. And when I find myself in a situation that is low,
I will not despair, even if I am reduced to the level of a humble beggar. At alltimes, during
the six periods of the night and day[14] I shall rely on you completely, O Padmasambhava,
as being inseparable from my root master!”

Recite this prayer with such intense and fervent devotion that the hairs onyour body stand on
end, tears stream from your eyes and your only thoughts are of your master. Recite the mantra
very strongly, as a kind of invocation ofyour master.

Then, recite the prayer once again and continue to recite the mantra as apractice of approach.[15]

Next is invoking the accomplishments. For this you should pray as follows:

“I have no one else to turn to, no one to rely on but you, preciousmaster! In these evil times,
beings of the Kaliyuga like myself aresinking in a swamp of intense and unbearable suffering.
We are plagued by outer sufferings such as illness, destructive influences, hostile
enemies and thieves, and by internal suffering caused by the five disturbing emotions. It
is as if we are caught between the jaws of a poisonous sea serpent. Free us from all this,
O great guru! Bestow the four empowerments to mature our body, speech and mind, O blessed
one! Direct your realization and experience into our minds, O compassionate one! Purify
our emotional and cognitive obscurations, O powerful one! You, who have liberated your own
being through your realization and have the capacity to liberate the minds of others out
of compassion, care for me!”

Pray like this and then recite the mantra as the practice of approach.

The mantra begins with the syllables OṂ, ĀḤ and HŪṂ, which are the seeds of the three vajras
(of the body, speech and mind). VAJRA signifies the dharmakāya, which is endowed with the
seven ‘vajra qualities’.[16]GURU signifies the sambhogakāya, which is endowed with unsurpassablequalities.
PADMA represents the nirmāṇakāya, since the radiant awareness of the wisdom
of discernment arises as the family of lotus speech. Consider that through the power of
praying from a state of recognizing the inseparability of the three kāyas, all the supreme
and ordinary accomplishments—SIDDHI—are obtained as you say, “HŪṂ” and think, “Grant them
to me!”

You can recite the mantra while keeping this in mind or, alternatively, youcan consider that
VAJRA is the essence of the vajra family, GURU is theessence of the ratna family, PADMA is
the essence of the padma family, SIDDHI is the essence of the karma family, and HŪṂ the
essence of the tathāgata family.

As you recite the mantra, train in perceiving the outer environment as thepure realm of Lotus
Light, and all the beings within it as deities of thethree roots. Allow any thoughts that
arise within your mind to liberatethemselves without leaving any trace behind, just like
a bird flying throughthe sky.

Next, before receiving the empowerments, we come to the prayer to the root and lineage masters.

Here EMAHO signifies that this prayer to Samantabhadra and the othermasters is wonderful. The
heavenly realm of the dharmakāya is free from any limits, and is not restricted to any particular
direction. It isimmeasurable and pervades throughout the whole of space. It is here
that thePrimordial Buddha, the dharmakāya Samantabhadra, resides. His wisdom-play, like
the reflection of the moon in water, is the sambhogakāya Vajrasattva.(Samantabhadra is like
the moon in the sky and his emanation Vajrasattva islike the moon’s reflection). Perfect,
with all major and minor marks andbuddha qualities, is the nirmāṇakāya Garab Dorje, the
emanation ofVajrasattva. Pray to them all, saying: “Grant me your blessings andliberating
empowerments!”

Śrī Siṃha is a master of the treasure of the ultimate Dharma. Mañjuśrīmitra is a universal ruler
of the teachings of the Nine Yānas: the Vinaya, Sūtras and Abhidharma; the Kriyā, Caryā
and Yoga tantras; and the teachings of Mahāyoga, Anuyoga and Atiyoga.[17] Pray to them
and to Jñānasūtra and the great paṇḍita Vimalamitra with the words, “Show me the way to make
my mind free! Grant me the essential instructions and show me the path of liberation!”

Padmasambhava is the sole ornament of this world of ours because his power and his kindness
are immeasurable. His supreme heart-disciples are the King Trisong Detsen, the subject Vairotsana,
and the companion Yeshe Tsogyal. Longchen Rabjam Drime Özer revealed a vast ocean
of the Precious Master’s wisdom mind treasures. Jigme Lingpa was entrusted with all the teachings
of the mind-direct, sign and word-of-mouth lineages, but especially with the space
treasury of the ḍākinīs. Pray to them all, saying, “Grant me the fruition of the essential
instructions and immediately grant me the siddhi of liberating my mind!”

Jigme Lingpa’s wisdom, compassionate love and spiritual power are like a great and glorious
ocean. Through the three kinds of faith, Jigme Trinle Özer forged a channel to these qualities
in Jigme Lingpa’s wisdom mind, as if he was drawing water from the ocean to establish
a reservoir on its shores.As he did so, his own wisdom mind was also filled. This process
could also becompared to making a tsa-tsa from a mould. In turn, just as a field isirrigated
by drawing water from a reservoir, Jigme Trinle Özer Palbarsaturated the minds of his
fortunate disciples with the qualities that hadarisen in his own wisdom mind. This is how
he brought them to maturity. Prayto him, saying: “May my faith and samaya commitment never
fail, but go on increasing!”

If you are really practising the teachings genuinely, you should have truerenunciation for saṃsāric
existence and the wish to attain liberation.Consider all that you have experienced
in the course of your lifetimes withoutbeginning, so that you become disgusted, like somebody
with a livercomplaint seeing a plate of greasy food.

You should rely upon your vajra lama, the ultimate master whose mind is emptiness and compassion
and who accomplishes the benefit of self and others, cherishing him as though he were
your very eyes. Follow his instructions to the letter, and take to heart the profound practices
he gives, not just now and then, but with diligent and constant application. Practise
with unflagging diligence for as long as you live. Pray that you may becomeworthy of the
transmission of his profound wisdom mind, so that yourrealization becomes indivisible from
his.

Recognize with certainty that all appearances, saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, from thevery beginning are
the Akaniṣṭha pure realm of Lotus Light. Allperceptions of visible forms and material objects
are perfected intobuddha forms. All sounds, whether pleasant or unpleasant, are purifiedinto
mantra. And all rising thoughts are matured into the clearlight state of dharmakāya
reality.

Once the meaning of śūnyatā has been actualized, there is no longer anyeffort to abandon what
is negative and adopt what is positive.There is no longer any grasping at things as being
real. All that you see,good or bad, all that you hear and all that you think arises out
of the stateof emptiness and is purified back into the state of emptiness, just like abird
flying through the sky without leaving any trace behind. This is theperfection that we call
the Great Perfection, or Dzogpachenpo.

The Prajñāpāramitā says:

Form is without any true nature,
And whatever lacks true nature is inexpressible.

And:

Forms are dream-like and illusory.

And:

Form is empty of form.
Sound is empty of sound.

And so on until:

Omniscience is empty of omniscience.

There is not a single phenomenon belonging to saṃsāra or nirvāṇa, from visibleform through to
omniscience, which is beyond the nature of this GreatPerfection or great emptiness.

This ultimate meaning is rigpa’s self-radiance beyond the experiences ofśamatha, or the thinking
and mental analysis of vipaśyanā. Pray thatyou may see this naked dharmatā reality, like
the sun free of clouds, with thewisdom of discriminating awareness.

The Sublime Continuum says:

The inner identity of the dharmakāya,
Is seen with the eyes of wisdom.

From the perspective of the various paths, this [stage] corresponds to thepath of seeing. It
is the first among the bodhisattva bhūmis, and the first ofthe four visions of tögal, the
direct experience of dharmatā.

Then, when you train in the practice of tögal, material reality canevaporate into rainbow experience,
and the kayas and tiklés can beexperienced as the radiance and dynamic energy of
rigpa. This equates tothe lesser and middle stages of the path of cultivation, from the second
tothe seventh bhūmi, and the second vision of tögal, which is known as'increased experience'.

After that you will arrive at the third vision. Here, rigpa’s strength isenhanced, maturing
into the fullness of sambhogakāya perfection. This isequivalent to the greater stage of the
path of cultivation, from the seventhto the tenth bhūmi. This is the point at which you
perceive directly thesambhogakāya fields and the buddhas of the five families together with
their consorts.

Finally you reach the level where all perception of phenomenal reality wearsout, and the conceptual
mind dies into the state of total enlightenment.This is the fourth vision, the fruition
of Dzogpachenpo, and it is equivalentto the path of no more learning, or the level of
buddhahood, the eleventhbhūmi of universal radiance.

Pray that you may gain the stronghold of the youthful vase body, themeaning of which has been
explained above, free from birth and death, thedharmakāya with its two-fold purity.

If you accomplish the practice of the great Atiyoga, and obtain the confidence of the ultimate
state of the dissolution of phenomena, beyond the ordinary mind, there will be no need
for you to wander in the bardos. But if you do not master the practice in this life, your
gross physical body will not be liberated into the pure space of the rainbow body.

Then, when the constituents of life fall apart at the completion of the stages of dissolution
at death, you should recognize the ground luminosity as the dharmakāya, pure from the beginning,
as soon as your consciousness reawakens.

At this point, the ground luminosity will dawn in the minds of all beings,without exception.
The only difference will be in terms of how long it appearsfor, and whether or not it is
recognized. If you do recognize the dharmakāya,you will be liberated.

For those who have gained some familiarity with the practices of kyerim ortögal, the appearances
of the bardo of dharmatā experience will arisein sambhogakāya forms; and they will be
liberated through meditating on theirillusory nature.

On the path of trekchö, all the rigidity of mind’s clinging to an ‘I’where there is no ‘I’,
and a self where there is no self, is cut through withMādhyamika Prāsaṅgika reasoning and
the resulting conviction that an ‘I’ or a‘self’ does not exist. Then, by examining [where
mind] arises, dwells andceases, you become certain of the absence of any true reality.

In tögal, all apparent objects are understood to be the energy and displayof mind and are brought
to perfection by the mind itself.

So, in the bardos, at first when you lose consciousness or stray intodelusion, meditate immediately
on the meaning of selflessness, and use yourfamiliarity with the kāyas of the deities
in tögal, or meditate on theillusory form of the deity as in kyerim. Pray that through
the power of suchpractices you may be liberated, as naturally as a child running into itsmother’s
lap.

In this great secret mantrayāna path of luminosity—Dzogpachenpo—the summit of all, enlightenment
is to be sought nowhere but in the dharmakāya face of your own mind through relying upon
the instructions of Atiyoga. Yet if you are not liberated into the primordial state by
actualizing this, then there are the five practices of 'enlightenment without meditating
for a long time': liberation through tasting the samaya substances, through takdrol,[18] through
contact with the karmamudrā, through seeing the chakras, and through hearing and remembering
the phowa.

Pray that you may be born into the nirmāṇakāya realms of the five buddhafamilies, such as Dewachen,
through practising the phowa method ofenlightenment without meditation. And pray especially
that you maytake birth in the ‘Palace of Lotus Light’, the Zangdokpalri heaven of
Guru Rinpoche.

Pray that you may take birth in the presence of the Lord of Orgyen himself, chief of the ocean
of vidyādhara masters, while he is celebrating the feast of the great secret mantra Dharma,
and that you may become his favourite son or daughter. And pray that, having taken birth
there, you may traverse the four levels of a vidyādhara, and reach the level of Samantabhadra.
Then, emanating nirmāṇakāya forms to take on the task of helping limitless beings,
may you bring benefit and happiness to them all!

Pray that through the inspiration and blessing of the ocean of victoriousvidyādharas, and by
the truth of the infinite dharmadhātu, beyondconception, and with this free and well-favoured
human form, you mayactualize the auspicious interconnection of perfecting the activity
of the buddhas and bodhisattvas, ripening the minds of sentient beings, and purifying the
whole outer and inner world into pure lands, and attain the state of buddhahood.

Take this practice to heart by combining your prayers of aspiration withactual mind training.

Receiving Empowerments

Next is the receiving of the path empowerments. All the surrounding deitiesdissolve into the
root master. Consider that he is the embodiment of allsources of refuge, and practise from
a state of intense devotion and longing.

In the guru’s forehead is the letter OṂ, radiant and shimmering, like moonlight; from it rays
of light stream out and enter your forehead. The three negative actions of the body and
blockages of the channels are purified. The blessing of the unchanging vajra body of the buddhas
infuses you . The vase empowerment is obtained and you become a receptive vessel for
the deity visualization practice of kyerim. The seed is sown for becoming a completely matured
vidyādhara, whose mind is matured into the dharmakāya while maintaining an ordinary
body. The potential or seed for obtaining the level of nirmāṇakāya is implanted within you.

At his throat is the letter ĀḤ, blazing like a ruby; from it rays of light streak out and enter
your throat. The four negative actions of the speech and blockages of the inner air are
purified. The blessing of the unceasing vajra speech of the buddhas enters you . The secret
empowerment is obtained and you become a receptive vessel for mantra recitation practice.
The seed of the vidyādhara with power over life is sown. The potential for obtaining the
level of the sambhogakāya is implanted within you.

At his heart, from the letter HŪṂ, sky-coloured rays of light pour out and plunge into your
heart. The three kinds of negative activity committed through the mind and blockages of the
tiklé of clinging to reality are purified. The blessing of the undeluded vajra mind of all
the buddhas is instilled in you . The knowledge-wisdom empowerment is obtained and you
become a receptive vessel for the caṇḍalī practice of bliss and emptiness, known as Tsa Lung
and Tummo. The seed is sown for becoming a 'Mahāmudrā Vidyādhara', whose body is transformed
into the form of the yidam and whose mind is inseparable from the wisdom mind of the
deity. The potential for obtaining the level of dharmakāya is implanted within you.

Again, from HŪṂ in his heart, a second letter HŪṂ bursts out like a shooting star and merges,
indistinguishably, one with your own mind. The karma of the ‘ground of all’, cognitive obscurations,
and all the subtle disturbing emotions, are purified. The blessing of the spontaneously
arising vajra wisdom, the unchanging luminosity, pervades you. You obtain the empowerment
of the absolute truth, symbolized by the word, through which the inexpressible
meaning is communicated using a crystal, a mirror or a gesture. You become a receptive vessel
for meditation on the meaning of trekchö and the primordial purity of Dzogpachenpo. The
seed is sown for becoming a spontaneously accomplishing vidyādhara[19] who spontaneously
accomplishes the benefit of self and others. The potential for the svābhāvikakāya—the final
fruition—is implanted within you.

When your life is at an end, at the moment of death, your whole perception should be the heaven
of Ngayab Ling or Cāmara, which is one of the eight sub-continents, and is also renowned
as the ‘island of rākṣasa demons’.

It is here that the Master Padmasambhava presently resides. Havingmiraculously liberated the
king of the rākṣasas, transferred hisconsciousness to a pure realm and entered his body,
he subdues the demonsthere through a variety of peaceful and wrathful methods and establishes
themin the Dharma.

In the centre of that field of Lotus Light and the Glorious Copper ColouredMountain, the nirmāṇakāya
pure land of indivisible appearance andemptiness created through self-arisen wisdom,
visualize your own body asVajrayoginī in the palace that was described above.

You are transformed into a radiant, shimmering sphere of light, whichdissolves into the heart
of Guru Rinpoche above your head, and merging,inseparable, with Padmasambhava, you attain
buddhahood.

Then, from the play of vast primordial wisdom, which is the miraculous manifestation of bliss
and emptiness, or compassion and emptiness, for every single being in the three realms,
you will emanate as their true guide, to lead them to liberation. Pray to Jetsün Pema so that
he might grant this prayer.

Say the following: “I pray to you from the bottom of my heart. It’s notjust words or empty mouthings:
grant your blessings from the depth of your wisdom mind, and cause all my good aspirations
that accord with the Dharma to be fulfilled!”

Visualize yourself clearly as Vajrayoginī. From the heart centre of the lama a beam of light,
red and warm, suddenly bursts out and touches your heart. Instantaneously, you are transformed
into a sphere of red light the size of a pea, which shoots up towards Padmasambhava,
like a spark that spits from the fire. It dissolves into Guru Rinpoche’s heart, merges and
becomes one with him: one taste.

Visualize this and then rest in the inexpressible state beyond any referenceor focus. If you
are able to breathe your final breath in this state at themoment of death, then you will
achieve the king of all phowas, ‘transference to the dharmakāya through the seal of the view’.
If you would like to practise any of theother methods of phowa, this is the time to do
so.

Then, as soon as you rise from the state of meditative equipoise, visualizeyour own body and
environment as before and recite the prayers that follow.

According to Jamyang Khyentse’s commentary, the prayer beginning, “Glorioustsawé lama, precious
one”, should continue with, “Dwell on the lotus-seat onthe crown of my head.” Most versions
of the text however, give the line as, “Dwell on the lotus-seat in the depth of my heart”.
According to a mengakfrom the instructions on phowa, you can visualize the master in
your heartinseparable from Amitāyus. But aside from providing a support for long-lifepractice,
I don’t think there is too much difference between these twoversions.

The prayer continues, “Look upon me with the grace of your great compassion, grant me the attainments
of body, speech and mind, and make my mind one with your wisdom mind!”

“Towards the lifestyle and activity of the lama, may wrong view not arisefor even an instant,
and may I see whatever he does, whether it seems to bein accordance with the Dharma or not,
as a teaching for me.” In thisrespect, you should remember the story of Captain Compassionate
Heart killingBlack Spearman, and Brahmin Lover of the Stars forsaking his vow of chastityfor
the brahmin girl.[20]

“Through such devotion may his blessing inspire and fill my mind.”

“In all my lives from now until I attain enlightenment, may I never be separated from the perfect
lama; and having benefitted fully from the splendour of the sacred Dharma, may I perfect
the qualities of the five paths and ten bhūmis, and swiftly attain the sublime level
of Vajradhara!

“Through the power of the merit of this practice I have done today,may all beings completely
accumulate the causal accumulation of meritand the resultant accumulation of wisdom. And
from this merit andwisdom, may they obtain the dharmakāya for the benefit of self and therūpakāya
for the benefit of others!

“Moreover, through all the merit that I and other beings have—whateverbeneficial actions we
have done in the past, will do in the futureand are doing now in the present— may all beings
attain the stage ofperfection! May they attain the realization of a buddha, the profound
wisdomof emptiness beyond the two extremes of eternalism and nihilism! In order thatthey
may swiftly reach this level of realization, I dedicate all the merit andvirtue accumulated
by myself and others: may it be the cause of all beingsattaining the stages of perfection
and full enlightenment!”

There are two types of dedication: the dedication free from any reference tothe three conceptual
spheres of subject, object or activity, and the emulatingdedication. The first of these
was explained earlier in the context of theseven branch practice. The second is as follows:

“Just as the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī knew how to dedicate and diddedicate towards the temporary
benefit of all beings as well as their ultimatehappiness with the attainment of enlightenment,
just as Samantabhadra didtoo, I shall train to follow in these bodhisattvas’ footsteps.
Imake a perfect dedication of all this merit towards the enlightenment of allbeings just
as these bodhisattvas did in the past.”

“As all buddhas, past, present and future praise the dedication for thesake of all beings attaining
enlightenment as supreme, all my sources ofmerit I dedicate completely, so that all
may perfect Samantabhadra’s ‘GoodActions’ and attain the state of buddhahood.”

Special Prayer

“In all my lives, wherever I am born, may I obtain the seven qualities ofbirth in higher realms:
long life, freedom from ill health, a beautifulform, high birth, great riches, good fortune,
and great wisdom! As soon as Iam born, may I meet the Dharma, and have the freedom
to practise it correctly.Then, may I please the noble lama, and put the Dharma into action
day and night. With confidence in the key points of the practice lineage andrealization
of the Dharma, may I practise the innermost meaning of emptiness and compassion until my mind
is purified! May I cross the ocean of suffering existence in the very same life and secure
my own wellbeing by attaining buddhahood! Having attained enlightenment, may I teach
the sacred Dharma to beings wandering in saṃsāra, and never grow mentally weary or physically
tired of working to help others. Through my vast, impartial service and waves of virtuous
activity for the benefit of others, may all beings, as limitless as space, attain buddhahood
together as one in a single gathering! And may saṃsāra be emptied from its very depths!”

As you recite these words with your speech, be sure to focus your mind upon
their meaning.

In order to integrate the Guru Yoga practice [into your daily life], visualizeyour master in
the sky above your right shoulder as you walk, and considerthat you are circumambulating
him. While you are sitting down, consider thathe is on the top of your head as a support for
your prayers. Whenever you eator drink something, visualize him at your throat and offer
him the firstportion. When you go to sleep, visualize the master in your heart and mergeyour
mind with his wisdom mind.

In short, train your mind in devotion at all times and on alloccasions by perceiving all forms,
sounds and rising thoughts as deity, mantraand wisdom play, and by considering all that
you perceive through your sixsenses to be the display of the master’s enlightened body,
speech and mind.

The Siddha Mokchokpa said:

If Acalā (Mikyöpa) is blue, then blue he may well be!If Avalokiteśvara is white, then white
he is!As for me, I’ve never been separated from the perception of the master!

And Jetsün Milarepa said:

When you grow weary of saṃsāra which is by nature suffering,There is no time to waste searching
for fresh robes,And towards the master, who embodies the buddhas of the three times,There
is no separation from a mind of yearning devotion.

This is how you should practise.

Colophon

This is the word-by-word commentary on the text of the Longchen Nyingtikpreliminary practices
entitled, ‘A Torch for the Excellent Path ofOmniscience’. As there are many ocean-like commentaries
on the preliminarypractices composed by the omniscient father and son,[21] this
may seem as unnecessary as digging a well of salty water on the shore of a great lake of
water possessing the eight qualities of purity.

The elaborate ngöndro commentaries give the root text without explaining each syllable, and
since those with sharp faculties understand the meaning of the elaborate commentaries there
is no need for them to rely on syllable-by-syllable explanations. Yet those with feeble
minds like myself find that thereis a lot we don’t understand when trying to match the points
of the elaboratecommentaries with the root text, so I thought a word-by-word commentary
on the recitation text would make it easier to practise.

None of the learned and accomplished beings of the past composed a word-by-word commentary that
definitively explained the straightforward and the subtle points of the root text, and
recently my attendants Dorje Chödrak and Trinley Jinpa have been requesting me to write a
word-by-word commentary to match the recitation text.

Dorje Chödrak made a commitment to remain in retreat, practising the ngöndro, for the rest of
his life, completing one million prostrations and ten million mantra recitations as part
of the Guru Yoga. Trinley Jinpa also vowed toremain in retreat practising the ngöndro for
the rest of his life, and tocomplete one million prostrations, one million hundred syllable
mantras, and a hundred thousand ‘Confessions of Downfalls’. Changchub Dorje also added
his request for a detailed commentary to those of the other two, and he, too,vowed not to
leave his retreat until the time of his death. He promised tocomplete ten million Siddhi mantras
and one million prostrations.

In response to their requests, and taking the works of the omniscient fatherand son as a basis,
supplemented by what I have seen or heard of the works ofother learned and accomplished
masters, this was written by the beggar-monkwith the name of Chökyi Drakpa. May the merit
of this become a cause for themain points of the ngöndro practice to arise within the minds
of all sentientbeings, especially those that requested it! May they never be without thequalities
of the seven noble riches, and may they swiftly attain the state ofomniscience,
becoming guides to all sentient beings as limitless as space!

Virtue! Virtue! Virtue!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2000, revised 2012.

There are different ways of interpreting this one of the five circumstantial advantages. Words
of My Perfect Teacher explains that it means we have entered the teachings. Some commentaries,
as is the case here, explain it as meaning that there are other people who have entered
the teachings.  ↩According to Patrul Rinpoche he was a brahmin. See Words of My Perfect
Teacher, p.115.  ↩Chökyi Drakpa does not specifically mention the pretas with internal
obscurations.  ↩See The Words of My Perfect Teacher, p.224–6.  ↩The four ways of attracting
disciples are 1) being generous, 2) speaking pleasantly, 3) teaching in accordance with
the needs of beings, and 4) acting in accordance with what one teaches.  ↩Although Vajrāṭopā
is sometimes given as the Sanskrit name of Vajrasattva's consort, whose Tibetan name is
Dorje Nyemma (rdo rje snyems ma), it seems that the correct Sanskrit name, which is attested
in several extant sources, is Vajragarvā.  ↩See Perfect Conduct, translated by Khenpo
Gyurme Samdrub & Sangye Khandro, Wisdom Publications, 1996, p.126.  ↩See Perfect Conduct,
pp.126–9.  ↩Seventh birth brahmins are bodhisattvas who have taken birth as brahmins seven
successive times, in order that they may benefit beings. Their flesh, bones, hair, nails
and so on are said to be especially pure, and if consumed can lead to the attainment of rainbow
body.  ↩Seventh birth brahmins are bodhisattvas who have taken birth as brahmins seven
successive times, in order that they may benefit beings. Their flesh, bones, hair, nails
and so on are said to be especially pure, and if consumed can lead to the attainment of
rainbow body.  ↩The Tibetan text says southwest here, but northwest later on.  ↩Secret Path
to the Mountain of Glory: A Prayer of Aspiration for the Copper-Coloured Mountain of Glory
by Rigdzin Jigme Lingpa.  ↩By Paṇchen Lobzang Chökyi Gyaltsen (1567?–1662). See The Union
of Bliss and Emptiness, H.H. the Dalai Lama, Ithaca: Snow Lion Publications, 1989 for
a translation of the entire text. The two verses mentioned here are 48 and 49, which are given
on pp.127–8.  ↩Dawn, morning, midday, afternoon, dusk and midnight.  ↩During the practice
of approach, practitioners grow closer to, or approach, the deity by reciting the mantra.
↩The seven vajra qualities are: uncuttable, indestructible, true, solid, stable, completely
unobstructable and completely invincible.  ↩This is an unusual way to list the nine
yānas. The first three vehicles are usually given as the vehicles of śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas
and bodhisattvas.  ↩Takdrol means ‘liberation through contact or touch’. Numerous kinds
of takdrol exist: many are mantras in diagrams related to the Dzogchen teachings, and
others belong to the tantras. The takdrol can form part of a more detailed empowerment, or
it can be given independently as a simple empowerment on its own. Sometimes a text of a
tantra is used as a takdrol and worn, for example, in a locket on the top of the head. (Taken
from Dzogchen, Ithaca: Snow Lion Publications, His Holiness the Dalai Lama, p.231, n.17)
↩Although this level of vidyādhara is usually called a "spontaneously accomplished vidyādhara",
this translation reflects Chökyi Drakpa’s explanation.  ↩See Words of My Perfect
Teacher, p. 125  ↩Longchen Rabjam and Jigme Lingpa.  ↩